
Barbarian
BARBARIAN
Primary Ability: Strength

Barbarians are warriors defined by their connection to the primal forces of the multiverse, which manifests as a Rage. Far more than a mere emotion, and not limited to anger or fury, a Barbarian’s Rage is an incarnation of a predator’s ferocity, a storm’s unrelenting assault, and the churning turmoil of the sea.

Some Barbarians personify their Rage as a fierce spirit or revered forebear. Others see it as a connection to the pain and anguish of the world, as an impersonal tangle of wild magic, or as an expression of their own deepest self. For every Barbarian, their Rage is a power that fuels not just battle prowess but also uncanny reflexes and heightened senses.

Some Barbarians are uncomfortable when hedged in by walls and crowds, preferring to live in regions of unspoiled natural vitality they cherish primal forces at work in farmlands. While others recognize the vitality and beauty of cities. Barbarians of all sorts embrace their own place in the multiverse, valuing keen instincts and raw physicality.

Even without the power of their Rage, Barbarians are skilled in combat and the use of weapons. When they do call on their Rage, it gives them superhuman strength and resilience. It also heightens their senses and reflexes, making the Rage useful beyond combat.

Barbarians often serve as protectors and leaders in their communities. They charge headlong into danger so those who are under their protection don’t have to. Their courage in the face of danger makes Barbarians perfectly suited for adventuring.

CREATING A BARBARIAN
To create a Barbarian, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a level 1 character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Barbarian” sidebar.

Then look at the Barbarian table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. Descriptions of those features appear in the “Barbarian Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d12 per Barbarian level
Hit Points at Level 1: 12 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Later Level: 1d12 (or 7) + your Constitution modifier per level
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
Skills (Choose 2): Animal Handling, Athletics, Intimidation, Nature, Perception, Survival
Weapons: Simple Weapons, Martial Weapons
Tools: None
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor, Medium Armor, Shields

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a level 1 character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 75 GP on equipment of your choice.

Explorer’s Pack
Greataxe
Handaxe (x4)
15 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE BARBARIAN
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Barbarian as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Barbarian’s primary ability, Strength, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you’re already a Barbarian.

Proficiencies Gained. If Barbarian isn’t your initial class, you gain proficiency with Martial Weapons when you take your first Barbarian level.

Armor Training. When you gain your first Barbarian level, you gain armor training with Shields.

BARBARIAN CLASS FEATURES
As a Barbarian, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Barbarian table.

The Barbarian class table
LEVEL 1: RAGE
You can imbue yourself with a primal power that is called your Rage, a force that grants you extraordinary might and resilience. You can enter it as a Bonus Action, provided you aren’t wearing Heavy Armor. You can enter your Rage the number of times shown for your Barbarian level in the Rages column of the Barbarian table. You regain one expended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. While active, your Rage has the effects below:

Damage Resistance. You have Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage.
Rage Damage. When you make an attack using Strength - with either a weapon or an Unarmed Strike - and deal damage to the target, you gain a bonus to the damage that increases as you gain levels as a Barbarian, as shown in the Rage Damage column of the Barbarian table.
Strength Advantage. You have Advantage on Strength checks and Strength saving throws.
No Concentration or Spells. You can’t maintain Concentration, and you can’t cast spells.
Duration. The Rage lasts until the end of your next turn, and it ends early if you don Heavy Armor or have the Incapacitated condition. If your Rage is still active on your next turn, you can extend the Rage for another round by doing one of the following:
Make an attack roll against an enemy.
Force an enemy to make a saving throw.
Take a Bonus Action to extend your Rage
Each time the Rage is extended, it lasts until the end of your next turn. You can maintain a Rage for up to 10 minutes.

LEVEL 1: UNARMORED DEFENSE
While you aren’t wearing any armor, your base Armor Class equals 10 + your Dexterity and Constitution modifiers. You can use a Shield and still gain this benefit.

LEVEL 1: WEAPON MASTERY
Your training with weapons allows you to use the Mastery property of two kinds of Simple or Martial melee weapons of your choice, such as Greataxes and Handaxes. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can practice weapon drills and change one of those weapon choices. When you reach certain Barbarian levels, you gain the ability to use the Mastery properties of more kinds of weapons, as shown in the Weapon Mastery column of the Barbarian table.

LEVEL 2: DANGER SENSE
You gain an uncanny sense of when things aren’t as they should be, giving you an edge when you dodge perils. You have Advantage on Dexterity saving throws, provided you don’t have the Incapacitated condition.

LEVEL 2: RECKLESS ATTACK
You can throw aside all concern for defense to attack with fierce ferocity. When you make your first attack roll on your turn, you can decide to attack recklessly. Doing so gives you Advantage on attack rolls using Strength until the start of your next turn, but attack rolls against you have Advantage during that time.

LEVEL 3: BARBARIAN SUBCLASS
You gain a Barbarian subclass of your choice:

Path of the Berserker
Path of the Wild Heart
Path of the World Tree
Path of the Zealot
Path of the Ancestral Guardian (Non-Playtest)
Path of the Beast (Non-Playtest)
Path of the Storm Herald (Non-Playtest)
Path of Wild Magic (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special features at certain Barbarian levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Barbarian level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

LEVEL 3: PRIMAL KNOWLEDGE
You gain proficiency in another skill of your choice from the list of skills available to Barbarians at level 1. In addition, while your Rage is active, you can channel primal power when you attempt certain tasks; whenever you make an ability check using one of the following skills, you can make it as a Strength check even if it normally uses a different ability: Acrobatics, Intimidation, Perception, Stealth, or Survival. When you use this ability, your Strength represents primal power coursing through you, honing your agility, bearing and senses.

LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Barbarian table, you gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16.

LEVEL 5: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice, instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

LEVEL 5: FAST MOVEMENT
Your speed increases by 10 feet while you aren’t wearing Heavy Armor.

LEVEL 7: FERAL INSTINCT
Your instincts are so honed that you have Advantage on Initiative rolls.

LEVEL 7: INSTINCTIVE POUNCE
As part of the Bonus Action you take to enter your Rage, you can move up to half your Speed.

LEVEL 9: BRUTAL STRIKE
If you use Reckless Attack, you can forgo Advantage on one Strength-based attack roll of your choice on your turn. The chosen attack roll mustn't have Disadvantage. If the chosen attack hits, the target takes an extra 1d10 damage of the same type dealt by the weapon or Unarmed Strike, and you can cause one Brutal Strike effect of your choice. You have the following effect options:

Forceful Blow. The target is pushed 15 feet straight away from you. You can then move up to half your Speed straight toward the target without provoking Opportunity Attacks.
Hamstring Blow. The target’s Speed is reduced by 15 feet until the start of your next turn. A target is only affected by the most recent Hamstring blow
LEVEL 11: RELENTLESS RAGE
Your Rage can keep you fighting despite grievous wounds. If you drop to 0 Hit Points while your Rage is active and don’t die outright, you can make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. If you succeed, your Hit Points instead change to a number equal to twice your Barbarian level. Each time you use this feature after the first, the DC increases by 5. When you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest, the DC resets to 10.

LEVEL 13: IMPROVED BRUTAL STRIKE
You have honed new ways to attack furiously. The following effects are now among your Brutal Strike options:

Staggering Blow. The target has Disadvantage on the next saving throw it makes, and it can’t make Opportunity Attacks until the start of your next turn.
Sundering Blow. Before the start of your next turn, the next attack roll made by another creature against the target gains a +5 bonus to that roll. An attack roll can gain only one Sundering Blow bonus.
LEVEL 15: PERSISTENT RAGE
When you roll Initiative, you can regain all expended uses of Rage. After you regain uses of Rage in this way, you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest. In addition, your Rage is so fierce that it now lasts for 10 minutes without you needing to do anything to extend it from round to round. The Rage ends early if you have the Unconscious condition (not the Incapacitated condition) or don Heavy Armor

LEVEL 17: BRUTAL STRIKE IMPROVEMENT
The extra damage your Brutal Strike deals increases to 2d10. In addition, you can use two different Brutal Strike effects when you use this feature.

LEVEL 18: INDOMITABLE MIGHT
If your total for a Strength check or Strength saving throw is less than your Strength score, you can use that score in place of the total.

LEVEL 19: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Irresistible Offense is recommended.

LEVEL 20: PRIMAL CHAMPION
You embody primal power. Your Strength and Constitution scores increase by 4, and their maximum is now 25.
---------------------------
PATH OF THE BERSERKER
For Barbarians who walk the Path of the Berserker, their Rage is primarily directed toward violence. Their path is one of untrammeled fury, and they thrill in the chaos of battle as they allow their Rage to seize and empower them.

LEVEL 3: FRENZY
If you use Reckless Attack while your Rage is active, you deal extra damage to the first target you hit on your turn with a Strength-based attack. To determine the extra damage, roll a number of d6s equal to your Rage Damage bonus, and add them together. The damage has the same type as the weapon or Unarmed Strike used for the attack.

LEVEL 6: MINDLESS RAGE
You have immunity to the Charmed and Frightened conditions while your Rage is active. If you’re Charmed or Frightened when you enter your Rage, that condition ends on you.

LEVEL 10: RETALIATION
When you take damage from a creature that is within 5 feet of you, you can take a Reaction to make one melee attack against that creature, using a weapon or an Unarmed Strike.

LEVEL 14: INTIMIDATING PRESENCE
As a Bonus Action, you can strike terror into others with your menacing presence and primal power. When you do so, each creature of your choice in a 30-foot Emanation origination from you must make a Wisdom saving throw (DC equal to 8 + your Proficiency Bonus + your Strength modifier). On a failed save, a creature has the Frightened condition for 1 minute. At the end of each of the Frightened creature’s turns, the creature repeats the saving throw, ending the effect on itself on a successful save.

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a use of your Rage (no action required) to restore your use of it.

---------------------------
PATH OF THE WILD HEART
Barbarians who follow the Path of the Wild Heart view themselves as kin to the animal inhabitants of the natural world. They learn magical means to connect and communicate with animals, and their Rage heightens their connection to animals as it fills them with supernatural might.

LEVEL 3: ANIMAL SPEAKER
You can cast the Beast Sense and Speak with Animals spells, but only as Rituals. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for them.

LEVEL 3: RAGE OF THE WILDS
Your Rage taps into the primal power of animals. Whenever you activate your Rage, you gain one of the following options of your choice:

Bear. While your rage is active, you have Resistance to every damage type except Force, Psychic, Necrotic and Radiant.
Eagle. When you activate your Rage, you can take the Disengage and Dash actions as part of that Bonus Action. While your Rage is active, you can take a Bonus Action to take both of those actions.
Wolf. While your Rage is active, your allies have Advantage on attack rolls against any enemy of yours within 5 feet of you.
LEVEL 6: ASPECT OF THE WILDS
You gain one of the following options of your choice. Whenever you gain finish a Long Rest, you can change your choice.

Owl. You have Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision, its range increases by 60 feet.
Panther. You have a Climb Speed equal to your Speed.
Salmon. You have a Swim Speed equal to your Speed.
LEVEL 10: NATURE SPEAKER
You can cast the Commune with Nature spell, but only as a Ritual. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for it.

LEVEL 14: POWER OF THE WILDS
Whenever you activate your Rage, you gain one of the following options of your choice.

Falcon. While your Rage is active, you have a Fly Speed equal to your Speed if you aren’t wearing any armor.
Lion. While your Rage is active, any of your enemies within 5 feet of you have Disadvantage on attack rolls against targets other than you or another Barbarian who has this option active.
Ram. While your Rage is active, you cause a Large or smaller creature to have the Prone condition when you hit it with a melee attack.

---------------------------
PATH OF THE WORLD TREE
Barbarians who follow the Path of the World Tree believe that their Rage links them to the cosmic ash tree Yggdrasil. This “world tree” grows among the Outer Planes, connecting them to each other and to the many worlds of the Material Plane, and the greatest plants on every world are said to be distant descendants of mighty Yggdrasil. These Barbarians draw on their connection to the world tree as a source of vitality and as a means of travel across the multiverse.

LEVEL 3: VITALITY OF THE TREE
Your Rage taps into the lifeforce of the World Tree. You gain the following benefits:

Vitality Surge. When you activate your Rage, you gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to your Barbarian level.
Life-Giving Force. At the start of each of your turns while your Rage is active, you can choose another creature within 10 feet of yourself to gain Temporary Hit Points. To determine the number of Temporary Hit Points, roll a number of d6s equal to your Rage Damage bonus, and add them together. If any of these Temporary Hit Points remain when your Rage ends, they vanish.
LEVEL 6: BRANCHES OF THE TREE
Whenever a creature you can see starts its turn within 30 feet of you while your Rage is active, you can take a Reaction to summon spectral branches of the World Tree around it. The target must succeed on a Strength saving throw (DC equal to 8 + your Proficiency Bonus + your Strength modifier) or be teleported to an unoccupied space you can see within 5 feet of yourself or in the nearest unoccupied space you can see. After the target teleports, you can reduce its Speed to 0 until the end of the current turn.

LEVEL 10: BATTERING ROOTS
During your turn, your reach is 10 feet greater with any Melee weapon that has Heavy or Versatile property, as tendrils of the World Tree extend from you. When you hit with such a weapon on your turn, you can activate the Push or Topple Mastery property in addition to any other Mastery property you are using with that weapon.

LEVEL 14: TRAVEL ALONG THE TREE
When you activate your Rage and as a Bonus Action while your Rage is active, you can teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. In addition, once per Rage, you can increase the range of that teleport to 150 feet. When you do so, you can also bring up to six willing creatures who are within 10 feet of you. Each creature teleports to an unoccupied space of your choice within 10 feet of your destination space.
---------------------------
PATH OF THE ZEALOT
For Barbarians who walk the Path of the Zealot, their Rage is not merely a connection to nature; it is a gift from a god. These Barbarians often experience their Rage as an ecstatic experience of union with their gods, infusing them with divine power to pursue the gods’ purposes in the world.

LEVEL 3: DIVINE FURY
You can channel divine power into your strikes. On each of your turns while your Rage is active, the first creature you hit with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike takes extra damage equal to 1d6 plus half your Barbarian level (round down). The extra damage is Necrotic or Radiant; you choose the type each time you deal the damage.

LEVEL 3: WARRIOR OF THE GODS
A divine entity helps ensure you can continue to fight. You have a pool of four d12s that you can spend to heal yourself. As a Bonus Action, you can expend dice from the pool, roll them, and regain a number of Hit Points equal to the roll's total. Your pool regains all expended dice when you finish a Long Rest. The pool's maximum number of dice increases by one when you reach Barbarian levels 6 (5 dice), 12 (6 dice) and 17 (7 dice).

LEVEL 6: FANATICAL FOCUS
Once per active Rage, if you fail a saving throw, you can reroll it with a bonus equal to your Rage Damage bonus, and you must use the new roll.

LEVEL 10: ZEALOUS PRESENCE
As a Bonus Action, you unleash a battle cry infused with divine energy. Up to ten other creatures of your choice within 60 feet of you gain Advantage on attack rolls and saving throws until the start of your next turn. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a use of your Rage (no action required) to restore your use of it.

LEVEL 14: RAGE OF THE GODS
When you activate your Rage, you can assume the form of a divine warrior. This form lasts for 1 minute or until you drop to 0 Hit Points. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. While in this form, you gain the benefits below.

Flight. You have a Fly Speed equal to your Speed and can hover.
Resistance. You have Resistance to Necrotic, Psychic and Radiant damage.
Revivification. When a creature within 30 feet of you would drop to 0 Hit Points, you can take a Reaction to expend a use of your Rage to instead change the target's Hit Points to a number equal to your Barbarian level.
---------------------------
Path of the Ancestral Guardian
Some barbarians hail from cultures that revere their ancestors. These tribes teach that the warriors of the past linger in the world as mighty spirits, who can guide and protect the living. When a barbarian who follows this path rages, the barbarian contacts the spirit world and calls on these guardian spirits for aid. Barbarians who draw on their ancestral guardians can better fight to protect their tribes and their allies. In order to cement ties to their ancestral guardians, barbarians who follow this path cover themselves in elaborate tattoos that celebrate their ancestors’ deeds. These tattoos tell sagas of victories against terrible monsters and other fearsome rivals.

3RD LEVEL: ANCESTRAL PROTECTORS
Spectral warriors appear when you enter your rage. While you’re raging, the first creature you hit with an attack on your turn becomes the target of the warriors, which hinder its attacks. Until the start of your next turn, that target has disadvantage on any attack roll that isn't against you, and when the target hits a creature other than you with an attack, that creature has resistance to the damage of the target’s attacks.

6TH LEVEL: SPIRIT SHIELD
The guardian spirits that aid you can provide supernatural protection to those you defend. If you are raging and a creature you can see within 30 feet of you takes damage, you can use your reaction to reduce that damage by 2d6. When you reach certain levels in this class, you can reduce the damage by more: by 3d6 at 10th level and by 4d6 at 14th level.

10TH LEVEL: CONSULT THE SPIRITS
You gain the ability to consult with your ancestral spirits. When you do so, you cast the Augury or Clairvoyance spell, without using a spell slot or material components. Rather than creating a spherical sensor, this use of Clairvoyance invisibly summons one of your ancestral spirits to the chosen location. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for these spells. After you cast either spell in this way, you can’t use this feature again until you finish a short or long rest.

14TH LEVEL: VENGEFUL ANCESTORS
Your ancestral spirits grow powerful enough to retaliate. When you use your Spirit Shield to reduce the damage of an attack, the attacker takes an amount of force damage that your Spirit Shield prevents.

---------------------------
Path Of The Beast
Barbarians who walk the Path of the Beast draw their rage from a bestial spark burning within their souls. That beast bursts forth in the throes of rage, physically transforming the barbarian. Such a barbarian might be inhabited by a primal spirit or be descended from shape-shifters. You can choose the origin of your feral might.

3RD LEVEL: FORM OF THE BEAST
When you enter your rage, you can transform, revealing the bestial power within you. Until the rage ends, you manifest a natural weapon. It counts as a simple melee weapon for you, and you add your Strength modifier to the attack and damage rolls when you attack with it, as normal. You choose the weapon’s form each time you rage:

Bite. Your mouth transforms into a bestial muzzle or great mandibles (your choice). It deals 1d8 piercing damage on a hit. Once on each of your turns when you damage a creature with this bite, you regain a number of hit points equal to your proficiency bonus, provided you have less than half your hit points when you hit.
Claws. Each of your hands transforms into a claw, which you can use as a weapon if it’s empty. It deals 1d6 slashing damage on a hit. Once on each of your turns when you attack with a claw using the Attack action, you can make one additional claw attack as part of the same action.
Tail. You grow a lashing, spiny tail, which deals 1d8 piercing damage on a hit and has the reach property. If a creature you can see within 10 feet of you hits you with an attack roll, you can use your reaction to swipe your tail and roll a d8, applying a bonus to your AC equal to the number rolled, potentially causing the attack to miss you.
6TH LEVEL: BESTIAL SOUL
The feral power within you increases, causing the natural weapons of your Form of the Beast to count as magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and immunity to non-magical attacks and damage. You can also alter your form to help you adapt to your surroundings. When you finish a short or long rest, choose one of the following benefits, which lasts until you finish a short or long rest:

You gain a swimming speed equal to your walking speed, and you can breathe underwater.
You gain a climbing speed equal to your walking speed, and you can climb difficult surfaces, including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an ability check.
When you jump, you can make a Strength (Athletics) check and extend your jump by a number of feet equal to the check’s total. You can make this special check only once per turn.
10TH LEVEL: INFECTIOUS FURY
When you hit a creature with your natural weapons while you are raging, the beast within you can curse your target with rabid fury. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw (DC equal to 8 + your Constitution modifier + your proficiency bonus) or suffer one of the following effects (your choice):

The target must use its reaction to make a melee attack against another creature of your choice that you can see.
Target takes 2d12 psychic damage.
You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
14TH LEVEL: CALL OF THE HUNT
The beast within you grows so powerful that you can spread its ferocity to others and gain resilience from them joining your hunt. When you enter your rage, you can choose a number of other willing creatures you can see within 30 feet of you equal to your Constitution modifier (minimum of one creature). You gain 5 temporary hit points for each creature that accepts this feature. Until the rage ends, the chosen creatures can use the following benefit once on each of their turns: when the creature hits a target with an attack roll and deals damage to it, the creature can roll a d6 and gain a bonus to the damage equal to the number rolled. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

---------------------------
Path of the Storm Herald
Typical barbarians harbor a fury that dwells within. Their rage grants them superior strength, durability, and speed. Barbarians who follow the Path of the Storm Herald learn instead to transform their rage into a mantle of primal magic that swirls around them. When in a fury, a barbarian of this path taps into nature to create powerful, magical effects.

Storm heralds are typically elite champions who train alongside druids, rangers, and others sworn to protect the natural realm. Other storm heralds hone their craft in elite lodges founded in regions wracked by storms, in the frozen reaches at the world’s end, or deep in the hottest deserts.

LEVEL 3: STORM AURA
You emanate a stormy, magical aura while you rage. The aura extends 10 feet from you in every direction, but not through total cover. Your aura has an effect that activates when you enter your rage, and you can activate the effect again on each of your turns as a bonus action. Choose desert, sea, or tundra. Your aura's effect depends on that chosen environment, as detailed below. You can change your environment choice whenever you gain a level in this class. If your aura's effects require a saving throw, the DC equals 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Constitution modifier.

Desert. When this effect is activated, all other creatures in your aura take 2 fire damage each. The damage increases when you reach certain levels in this class, increasing to 3 at 5th level, 4 at 10th level, 5 at 15th level, and 6 at 20th level.
Sea. When this effect is activated, you can choose one other creature you can see in your aura. The target must make a Dexterity saving throw. The target takes 1d6 lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. The damage increases when you reach certain levels in this class, increasing to 2d6 at 10th level, 3d6 at 15th level, and 4d6 at 20th level.
Tundra. When this effect is activated, each creature of your choice in your aura gains 2 temporary hit points, as icy spirits inure it to suffering. The temporary hit points increase when you reach certain levels in this class, increasing to 3 at 5th level, 4 at 10th level, 5 at 15th level, and 6 at 20th level.
LEVEL 6: STORM SOUL
The storm grants you benefits even when your aura isn't active. The benefits are based on the environment you chose for your Storm Aura.

Desert. You gain resistance to fire damage, and you don’t suffer the effects of extreme heat, as described in the Dungeon Master's Guide. Moreover, as an action, you can touch a flammable object that isn't being worn or carried by anyone else and set it on fire.
Sea. You gain resistance to lightning damage, and you can breathe underwater. You also gain a swimming speed of 30 feet.
Tundra. You gain resistance to cold damage, and you don’t suffer the effects of extreme cold, as described in the Dungeon Master's Guide. Moreover, as an action, you can touch water and turn a 5-foot cube of it into ice, which melts after 1 minute. This action fails if a creature is in the cube.
LEVEL 10: SHIELDING STORM
You learn to use your mastery of the storm to protect others. Each creature of your choice has the damage resistance you gained from the Storm Soul feature while the creature is in your Storm Aura.

LEVEL 14: RAGING STORM
At 14th level, the power of the storm you channel grows mightier, lashing out at your foes. The effect is based on the environment you chose for your Storm Aura.

Desert. Immediately after a creature in your aura hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to force that creature to make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes fire damage equal to your Barbarian level.
Sea. When you hit a creature in your aura with an attack, you can use your reaction to force that creature to make a Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is knocked prone, as if struck by a wave.
Tundra. Whenever the effect of your Storm Aura is activated, you can choose one creature you can see in the aura. That creature must succeed on a Strength saving throw, or its speed is reduced to 0 until the start of your next turn, as magical frost covers it.
---------------------------
Path of Wild Magic
Many places in the multiverse abound with beauty, intense emotion, and rampant magic; the Feywild, the Upper Planes, and other realms of supernatural power radiate with such forces and can profoundly influence people. As folk of deep feeling, barbarians are especially susceptible to these wild influences, with some barbarians being transformed by the magic. These magic-suffused barbarians walk the Path of Wild Magic. Elf, tiefling, aasimar, and genasi barbarians often seek this path, eager to manifest the otherworldly magic of their ancestors.

3RD LEVEL: MAGIC AWARENESS
As an action, you can open your awareness to the presence of concentrated magic. Until the end of your next turn, you know the location of any spell or magic item within 60 feet of you that isn’t behind total cover. When you sense a spell, you learn which school of magic it belongs to. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

3RD LEVEL: WILD SURGE
The magical energy roiling inside you sometimes erupts from you. When you enter your rage, roll on the Wild Magic table to determine the magical effect produced. If the effect requires a saving throw, the DC equals 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Constitution modifier.

Wild Magic Table
d8	Effect
1	Each creature of your choice that you can see within 30 feet of you must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or take 1d12 necrotic damage. You also gain temporary hit points equal to 1d12 plus your barbarian level.
2	You teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. Until your rage ends, you can use this effect again on each of your turns as a bonus action.
3	An intangible spirit, which looks like a flumph or a pixie (your choice), appears within 5 feet of one creature of your choice that you can see within 30 feet of you. At the end of the current turn, the spirit explodes, and each creature within 5 feet of it must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 1d6 force damage. Until your rage ends, you can use this effect again, summoning another spirit, on each of your turns as a bonus action.
4	Magic infuses one weapon of your choice that you are holding. Until your rage ends, the weapon's damage type changes to force, and it gains the light and thrown properties, with a normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. If the weapon leaves your hand, the weapon reappears in your hand at the end of the current turn.
5	Whenever a creature hits you with an attack roll before your rage ends, that creature takes 1d6 force damage, as magic lashes out in retribution.
6	Until your rage ends, you are surrounded by multicolored, protective lights; you gain a +1 bonus to AC, and while within 10 feet of you, your allies gain the same bonus.
7	Flowers and vines temporarily grow around you; until your rage ends, the ground within 15 feet of you is difficult terrain for your enemies.
8	A bolt of light shoots from your chest. Another creature of your choice that you can see within 30 feet of you rust succeed on a Constitution Saving throw or take 1d6 radiant damage and be blinded until the start of your next turn. Until your rage ends, you can use this effect again on each of your turns as a bonus action.
6TH LEVEL: BOLSTERING MAGIC
You can harness your wild magic to bolster yourself or a companion. As an action, you can touch one creature (which can be yourself) and confer one of the following benefits of your choice to that creature:

For 10 minutes, the creature can roll a d3 whenever making an attack roll or an ability check and add the number rolled to the d20 roll.
Roll a d3. The creature regains one expended spell slot, the level of which equals the number rolled or lower (the creature’s choice). Once a creature receives this benefit, that creature can’t receive it again until after a long rest.
You can take this action a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

10TH LEVEL: UNSTABLE BACKLASH
When you are imperiled during your rage, the magic within you can lash out; immediately after you take damage or fail a saving throw while raging, you can use your reaction to roll on the Wild Magic table and immediately produce the effect rolled. This effect replaces your current Wild Magic effect.

14TH LEVEL: CONTROLLED SURGE
Whenever you roll on the Wild Magic table, you can roll the die twice and choose which of the two effects to unleash. If you roll the same number on both dice, you can ignore the number and choose any effect on the table.

=========================
Bard
Primary Ability: Charisma

Invoking magic through music, dance, and verse, Bards are expert at inspiring others, soothing hurts, disheartening foes, and creating illusions.

Bards believe that the creators of the multiverse spoke and signed it into existence and that remnants of those Words of Creation still resound and glimmer on every plane of existence. The magic of Bards is an attempt to harness those words—which transcend any language—and direct them to create new wonders.

Because the Words of Creation resonate throughout the cosmos, different Bards choose different approaches to their magic. Some Bards practice their arts in temples or monasteries, drawing on the power of the Outer Planes to channel divine magic. Others listen to bird song and the music of the wind, associate with Druid circles, and wield primal magic. Still others immerse themselves in the study of magical lore, collecting scraps of mystic knowledge wherever their journeys take them as they master the secrets of arcane magic. Ultimately, though, these various paths converge as the most accomplished Bards learn to access almost the entire breadth of magical potential. Anything can inspire a new song or tale, so Bards are fascinated by almost everything.

They have a wide-ranging knowledge of many subjects and develop an aptitude to do almost anything well. Bards become masters of many things, including performing music, working magic, and making jests. Not every singer or poet in a tavern or jester in a royal court is a Bard. Harnessing the Words of Creation requires hard work and some measure of natural talent that most troubadours and jongleurs lack.

A Bard’s life is spent wandering across the land gathering lore, telling stories, and living on the gratitude of audiences, much like any other entertainer. But Bards’ depth of knowledge and mastery of magic sets them apart.

CREATING A BARD
To create a Bard, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a 1st-level character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Bard” section.

Then look at the Bard table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. The descriptions of those features appear in the “Bard Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d8 per Bard level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Level after 1st: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Dexterity, Charisma
Skills: Any three skills of your choice
Weapons: Simple Weapons
Tools: Three musical instruments of your choice
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a 1st-level character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 100 GP on equipment of your choice.

Dagger (x2)
Entertainer’s Pack
Leather Armor
Musical Instrument (one of your choice)
26 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE BARD
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Bard as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Bard’s primary ability, Charisma, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you are already a Bard.
Proficiencies. If Bard isn’t your initial class, here are the proficiencies you gain when you take your first Bard level: one skill of your choice and one Musical Instrument of your choice.
Armor Training. When you gain your first Bard level, you gain Light Armor training.
Spell Slots. Add all your Bard levels to the appropriate levels from other classes to determine your available spell slots for casting spells, as detailed in the multiclassing rules. You prepare spells for each of your classes individually, referring to the spell slots of an individual class to determine the number and levels of the spells you prepare for it.
BARD CLASS FEATURES
As a Bard, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Bard table.



1ST LEVEL: BARDIC INSPIRATION
You can supernaturally inspire others through words, music, or dance. This inspiration is represented by your Bardic Inspiration die, which is a d6.

Using Bardic Inspiration. As a Bonus Action, you can inspire another creature within 60 feet of yourself who can see or hear you. That creature gains one of your Bardic Inspiration dice. A creature can have only one Bardic Inspiration die at a time. Once within the next hour when the creature fails a D20 Test, the creature can roll that die and add the number rolled to the d20, potentially turning the failure into a success. A Bardic Inspiration die is expended when it’s rolled.
Number of Uses. You can confer a Bardic Inspiration die a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.
At Higher Levels. Your Bardic Inspiration die changes when you reach certain Bard levels, as shown in the Bardic Die column of the Bard table. The die becomes a d8 at 5th level, a d10 at 10th level, and a d12 at 15th level.
1ST LEVEL: SPELLCASTING
You have learned to cast spells through your bardic arts. See the Player’s Handbook for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as a Bard.

Cantrips. You know two cantrips of your choice from your Bard spell list. Whenever you gain a Bard level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from your Bard spell list. When you reach 4th and 10th level in this class, you learn another cantrip of your choice from your Bard spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Bard table.
Spell Slots. The Bard table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. To cast one of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest.
Prepared Spells of 1st+ Level. You prepare the list of spells of 1st level and higher that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four level 1 spells from your Bard spell list. The number of spells on your list also increases as you gain Bard levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Bard table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from your Bard spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a 3rd-level Bard, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If another Bard feature gives spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells on the list you prepare with this Spellcasting feature, but those spells otherwise follow the rules in this feature.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Bard level, you can replace one spell on your list with another spell for which you have spell slots and that is on your Bard spell list.
Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is your Spellcasting Ability for your Bard spells.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use a musical instrument as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you cast with your Bard features.
2ND LEVEL: EXPERTISE
You gain Expertise in two of your skill proficiencies of your choice. Performance and Persuasion are recommended if you have proficiency in them. At Bard level 9, you gain Expertise in two more of your skill proficiencies of your choice.

2ND LEVEL: JACK OF ALL TRADES
You can add half your Proficiency Bonus (round down) to any ability check you make that uses a skill proficiency you lack and that doesn’t otherwise use your Proficiency Bonus. For example, if you make a Strength (Athletics) check and lack Athletics proficiency, you can add half your Proficiency Bonus to the check.

3RD LEVEL: BARD SUBCLASS
You gain a Bard subclass of your choice:

College of Dance
College of Glamour
College of Lore
College of Valor
College of Creation (Non-Playtest)
College of Eloquence (Non-Playtest)
College of Swords (Non-Playtest)
College of Whispers (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special abilities at certain Bard levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Bard level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

4TH LEVEL: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Bard table, you gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16.

5TH LEVEL: FONT OF INSPIRATION
You now regain all your expended uses of Bardic Inspiration when you finish a Short Rest. In addition, you can expend a spell slot (no action required) to regain one expended use of Bardic Inspiration.

7TH LEVEL: COUNTERCHARM
You can use musical notes or words of power to disrupt mind-influencing effects. If you or a creature within 30 feet of you fails a saving throw against an effect that applies the Charmed or Frightened condition, you can take a Reaction to cause the save to be rerolled, and the new roll has Advantage.

10TH LEVEL: MAGICAL SECRETS
You've learned secrets from various magical traditions. Whenever you reach a Bard level (including this level) and the Prepared Spells number in the Bard Features table increases, you can choose any of your new spells from the Bard, Cleric, Druid and Wizard spell lists and the chosen spells count as Bard spells for you. In addition, whenever you replace a spell prepared for this class, you can replace it with a spell from those lists.

18TH LEVEL: SUPERIOR INSPIRATION
When you roll Initiative, you regain expended uses of Bardic Inspiration until you have two if you have fewer than that.

19TH LEVEL: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Spell Recall is recommended.

20TH LEVEL: WORDS OF CREATION
You have mastered two of the prime Words of Creation: the words of life and death. You therefore always have the Power Word Heal and Power Word Kill spells prepared, and when you cast either spell, you can target a second creature with it, if that creature is within 10 feet of the first target.
---------------------------
COLLEGE OF DANCE
Bards of the College of Dance know that the Words of Creation can’t be contained within speech or even song; they are uttered by the movements of celestial bodies and flow through the motions of even the smallest creatures. To these Bards, dance is art freed from the constraints of a single point in space and time; it is meaning unconfined by narrow definitions of words and structures of grammar. The College of Dance practices a way of being in harmony with the ever-whirling cosmos, emphasizing agility, speed, and grace.

3RD LEVEL: DAZZLING FOOTWORK
Your practice of dance gives you the ability to gracefully dodge and make agile strikes. While you aren’t wearing armor or wielding a Shield, you gain the following benefits:

Dance Virtuoso. You have Advantage on any Charisma (Performance) check you make that involves you dancing.
Unarmored Defense. Your base Armor Class equals 10 plus your Dexterity and Charisma modifiers.
Agile Strikes. When you expend a use of your Bardic Inspiration as part of an action, a Bonus Action, or a Reaction, you can make one Unarmed Strike as part of that action, Bonus Action, or Reaction.
Bardic Damage. You can use Dexterity instead of Strength for the attack rolls of your Unarmed Strikes. When you deal damage with an Unarmed Strike, you can deal Bludgeoning damage equal to a roll of your Bardic Inspiration die plus your Dexterity modifier, instead of the strike’s normal damage. This roll doesn’t expend the die.
6TH LEVEL: INSPIRING MOVEMENT
When an enemy you can see ends its turn within 5 feet of you, you can take a Reaction and expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration to move up to half your Speed. Then one ally of your choice within 30 feet of you can also move up to half their Speed using their Reaction.

None of this feature’s movement provokes Opportunity Attacks.

6TH LEVEL: TANDEM FOOTWORK
When you roll Initiative, you can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration if you don’t have the Incapacitated condition. When you do so, roll your Bardic Inspiration die; you and each ally within 30 feet of you who can see or hear you gains a bonus to Initiative equal to the number rolled.

14TH LEVEL: LEADING EVASION
When you are subjected to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, you instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving throw and only half damage if you fail. If any creatures within 5 feet of you are making the same Dexterity saving throw, you can share this benefit with them for that save.

You can’t use this feature if you have the Incapacitated condition.
---------------------------
COLLEGE OF GLAMOUR
The College of Glamour traces its origins to the beguiling magic of the Feywild. The Bards who study this magic weave threads of beauty and terror into their songs and stories, and the mightiest among them can cloak themselves in otherworldly majesty. Their performances stir up wistful longing for forgotten innocence, evoke unconscious memories of long-held fears, and tug at the emotions of even the most hard-hearted listeners.

3RD LEVEL: BEGUILING MAGIC
You always have the Charm Person and Mirror Image spells prepared. In addition, immediately after you cast an Enchantment or Illusion spell using a spell slot, you can cause a creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself to make a Wisdom saving throw against your Spell Save DC. On a failed save, the target has the Charmed or Frightened condition (your choice) for 1 minute. The target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Once you use this benefit, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of the feature by expending one use of your Bardic Inspiration (no action required).

3RD LEVEL: MANTLE OF INSPIRATION
You can weave fey magic into a song or dance to fill others with vigor. As a Bonus Action, you can expend a use of Bardic Inspiration, rolling a Bardic Inspiration die. When you do so, choose a number of other creatures within 60 feet of yourself, up to a number equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). Each of those creatures gains a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to 2 times the number rolled on the Bardic Inspiration die, and then each of them can use its Reaction to move up to its Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks.

6TH LEVEL: MANTLE OF MAJESTY
You always have the Command spell prepared. As a Bonus Action, you cast Command without expending a spell slot, and you take on an unearthly appearance for 1 minute or until your Concentration ends (as if you were concentrating on a spell). During this time, you can cast Command as a Bonus Action without expending a spell slot. Any creature Charmed by you automatically fails its saving throw against the Command you cast with this feature. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 3+ spell slot (no action required).

14TH LEVEL: UNBREAKABLE MAJESTY
As a Bonus Action, you can assume a magically majestic presence for 1 minute or until you have the Incapacitated condition. For the duration, whenever any creature hits you with an attack roll for the first time on a turn, the attacker must succeed on a Charisma saving throw against your Spell Save DC, or the attack misses instead, as the creature recoils from your majesty. Once you assume this majestic presence, you can’t do so again until you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest.
---------------------------
COLLEGE OF LORE
Bards of the College of Lore plumb the depths of magical knowledge, collecting spells and secrets from sources as diverse as scholarly tomes, mystical rites, and peasant tales. The college’s members gather in libraries and universities to share their lore with one another. They also meet at festivals or affairs of state, where they can expose corruption, unravel lies, and poke fun at self-important figures of authority.

3RD LEVEL: BONUS PROFICIENCIES
You gain proficiency with three skills of your choice.

3RD LEVEL: CUTTING WORDS
You learn how to use your wit to supernaturally distract, confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence and competence of others. When a creature that you can see within 60 feet of you makes a damage roll or succeeds on an ability check or attack roll, you can take a Reaction to expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration, roll your Bardic Inspiration die, and subtract the number rolled from the creature’s roll, reducing the damage or potentially turning the success into a failure.

6TH LEVEL: MAGICAL DISCOVERIES
You learn two spells of your choice. These spells can come from the Cleric, Druid, or Wizard spell list or any combination thereof. A spell you choose must be a cantrip or a spell for which you have spell slots, as shown on the Bard table. You always have the chosen spells prepared, and whenever you gain a Bard level, you can replace one of the spells with another spell that meets the requirements above.

14TH LEVEL: PEERLESS SKILL
When you make an ability check or attack roll and fail, you can expend one use of Bardic Inspiration, roll the Bardic Inspiration die, and add the number rolled to the d20, potentially turning a failure into a success. On a failure, the Bardic Inspiration isn’t expended.
---------------------------
COLLEGE OF VALOR
Bards of the College of Valor are daring storytellers whose tales keep alive the memory of the great heroes of the past. These Bards sing the deeds of the mighty, both past and present, in vaulted halls or to crowds gathered around great bonfires. They travel the land to witness great events firsthand and to ensure that the memory of these events doesn’t pass from the world. With their songs, they inspire new generations to reach the same heights of accomplishment as the heroes of old.

3RD LEVEL: COMBAT INSPIRATION
You can use your wit to turn the tide of battle. A creature that has a Bardic Inspiration die from you can use it for one of the following effects:

Defense. When the creature is hit by an attack roll, that creature can use its Reaction to roll the Bardic Inspiration die and add the number rolled to its AC against that attack, potentially causing the attack to miss.
Offense. Immediately after the creature hits a target with an attack roll, the creature can roll the Bardic Inspiration die and add the number rolled to the attack’s damage against the target.
3RD LEVEL: MARTIAL TRAINING
You gain proficiency with Martial Weapons and armor training with Medium Armor and Shields. In addition, you can use a Simple or Martial weapon as a Spellcasting Focus to cast spells from your Bard spell list.

6TH LEVEL: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. In addition, you can cast one of your cantrips that has a casting time of an action in place of one of those attacks.

14TH LEVEL: BATTLE MAGIC
After you cast a spell that has a casting time of an action, you can make one attack with a weapon as a Bonus Action.
---------------------------
College of Creation
Bards believe the cosmos is a work of art - the creation of the first dragons and gods. That creative work included harmonies that continue to resound through existence today, a power known as the Song of Creation. The bards of the College of Creation draw on that primeval song through dance, music, and poetry, and their teachers share this lesson: "Before the sun and the moon, there was the Song, and its music awoke the first dawn. Its melodies so delighted the stones and trees that some of them gained a voice of their own. And now they sing too. Learn the Song, students, and you too can teach the mountains to sing and dance." Dwarves and gnomes often encourage their bards to become students of the Song of Creation. And among dragonborn, the Song of Creation is revered.

3RD LEVEL: NOTE OF POTENTIAL
Whenever you give a creature a Bardic Inspiration die, you can utter a note from the Song of Creation to create a Tiny mote of potential, which orbits within 5 feet of that creature. The mote is intangible and invulnerable, and it lasts until the Bardic Inspiration die is lost. The mote looks like a musical note, a star, a flower, or another symbol of art or life that you choose.When the creature uses the Bardic Inspiration die, the mote provides an additional effect based on whether the die benefits an ability check, an attack roll, or a saving throw, as detailed below:

Ability Check. When the creature rolls the Bardic Inspiration die to add it to an ability check, the creature can roll the Bardic Inspiration die again and choose which roll to use, as the mote pops and emits colorful, harmless sparks for a moment.
Attack Roll. Immediately after the creature rolls the Bardic Inspiration die to add it to an attack roll against a target, the mote thunderously shatters. The target and each creature of your choice that you can see within 5 feet of it must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against your spell save DC or take thunder damage equal to the number rolled on the Bardic Inspiration die.
Saving Throw. Immediately after the creature rolls the Bardic Inspiration die and adds it to a saving throw, the mote vanishes with the sound of soft music, causing the creature to gain temporary hit points equal to the number rolled on the Bardic Inspiration die plus your Charisma modifier (minimum of 1 temporary hit point).
3RD LEVEL: PERFORMANCE OF CREATION
As an action, you can channel the magic of the Song of Creation to create one non-magical item of your choice in an unoccupied space within 10 feet of you. The item must appear on a surface or in a liquid that can support it. The gp value of the item can't be more than 20 times your bard level, and the item must be Medium or smaller. The item glimmers softly, and a creature can faintly hear music when touching it. The created item disappears after a number of hours equal to your proficiency bonus. For examples of items you can create, see the equipment chapter of the Player's Handbook. Once you create an item with this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend a spell slot of 2nd level or higher to use this feature again. You can have only one item created by this feature at a time; if you use this action and already have an item from this feature, the first one immediately vanishes. The size of the item you can create with this feature increases by one size category when you reach 6th level (Large) and 14th level (Huge).

6TH LEVEL: ANIMATING PERFORMANCE
As an action, you can target a Large or smaller non-magical item you can see within 30 feet of you and animate it. The animated item uses the Dancing Item stat block, which uses your proficiency bonus (PB). The item is friendly to you and your companions and obeys your commands. It lives for 1 hour, until it is reduced to 0 hit points, or until you die. In combat, the item shares your initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It can move and use its reaction on its own, but the only action it takes on its turn is the Dodge action, unless you take a bonus action on your turn to command it to take another action. That action can be one in its stat block or some other action. If you are incapacitated, the item can take any action of its choice, not just Dodge. When you use your Bardic Inspiration feature, you can command the item as part of the same bonus action you use for Bardic Inspiration. Once you animate an item with this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend a spell slot of 3rd level or higher to use this feature again. You can have only one item animated by this feature at a time; if you use this action and already have a dancing item from this feature, the first one immediately becomes inanimate.

14TH LEVEL: CREATIVE CRESCENDO
When you use your Performance of Creation feature, you can create more than one item at once. The number of items equals your Charisma modifier (minimum of two items). If you create an item that would exceed that number, you choose which of the previously created items disappears. Only one of these items can be of the maximum size you can create; the rest must be Small or Tiny. You are no longer limited by gp value when creating items with Performance of Creation.
---------------------------
College of Eloquence
Adherents of the College of Eloquence master the art of oratory. Persuasion is regarded as a high art, and a well-reasoned, well-spoken argument often proves more powerful than objective truth. These bards wield a blend of logic and theatrical wordplay, winning over skeptics and detractors with logical arguments, and plucking at heartstrings to appeal to the emotions of entire audiences.

3RD LEVEL: SILVER TONGUE
You are a master at saying the right thing at the right time. When you make a Charisma (Persuasion) or Charisma (Deception) check, you can treat a d20 roll of 9 or lower as a 10.

3RD LEVEL: UNSETTLING WORDS
You can spin words laced with magic that unsettle a creature and cause it to doubt itself. As a bonus action, you can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration and choose one creature you can see within 60 feet of you. Roll the Bardic Inspiration die. The creature must subtract the number rolled from the next saving throw it makes before the start of your next turn.

3RD LEVEL: UNFAILING INSPIRATION
Your inspiring words are so persuasive that others feel driven to succeed. When a creature adds one of your Bardic Inspiration dice to its ability check, attack roll, or saving throw and the roll fails, the creature can keep the Bardic Inspiration die.

6TH LEVEL: UNIVERSAL SPEECH
You have gained the ability to make your speech intelligible to any creature. As an action, choose one or more creatures within 60 feet of you, up to a number equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). The chosen creatures can magically understand you, regardless of the language you speak, for 1 hour. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend a spell slot to use it again.

14TH LEVEL: INFECTION INSPIRATION
When you successfully inspire someone, the power of your eloquence can now spread to someone else. When a creature within 60 feet of you adds one of your Bardic Inspiration dice to its ability check, attack roll, or saving throw and the roll succeeds, you can use your reaction to encourage a different creature (other than yourself) that can hear you within 60 feet of you, giving it a Bardic Inspiration die without expending any of your Bardic Inspiration uses. You can use this reaction a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
College of Swords
Bards of the College of Swords are called blades, and they entertain through daring feats of weapon prowess. Blades perform stunts such as sword swallowing, knife throwing and juggling, and mock combats. Though they use their weapons to entertain, they are also highly trained and skilled warriors in their own right. Their talent with weapons inspires many blades to lead double lives. One blade might use a circus troupe as cover for nefarious deeds such as assassination, robbery, and blackmail. Other blades strike at the wicked, bringing justice to bear against the cruel and powerful. Most troupes are happy to accept a blade’s talent for the excitement it adds to a performance, but few entertainers fully trust a blade in their ranks. Blades who abandon their lives as entertainers have often run into trouble that makes maintaining their secret activities impossible. A blade caught stealing or engaging in vigilante justice is too great a liability for most troupes. With their weapon skills and magic, these blades either take up work as enforcers for thieves’ guilds or strike out on their own as adventurers.

3RD LEVEL: BONUS PROFICIENCIES
You gain proficiency with medium armor and the scimitar. If you’re proficient with a simple or martial melee weapon, you can use it as a spellcasting focus for your bard spells.

3RD LEVEL: FIGHTING STYLE
You adopt a particular style of fighting as your specialty. Choose one of the following Fighting Style feats:

Dueling
Two-Weapon Fighting
3RD LEVEL: BLADE FLOURISH
You learn to conduct impressive displays of martial prowess and speed. Whenever you take the Attack action on your turn, your walking speed increases by 10 feet until the end of the turn, and if a weapon attack that you make as part of this action hits a creature, you can use one of the following Blade Flourish options of your choice. You can use only one Blade Flourish option per turn.

Defensive Flourish. You can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration to cause the weapon to deal extra damage to the target you hit. The damage equals the number you roll on the Bardic Inspiration die. You also add the number rolled to your AC until the start of your next turn.
Slashing Flourish. You can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration to cause the weapon to deal extra damage to the target you hit and to any other creature of your choice that you can see within 5 feet of you. The damage equals the number you roll on the Bardic Inspiration die.
Mobile Flourish. You can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration to cause the weapon to deal extra damage to the target you hit. The damage equals the number you roll on the Bardic Inspiration die. You can also push the target up to 5 feet away from you, plus a number of feet equal to the number you roll on that die. You can then immediately use your reaction to move up to your walking speed to an unoccupied space within 5 feet of the target.
6TH LEVEL: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice, instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

14TH LEVEL: MASTER'S FLOURISH
Whenever you use a Blade Flourish option, you can roll a d6 and use it instead of expending a Bardic Inspiration die.
---------------------------
College of Whispers
Most folk are happy to welcome a bard into their midst. Bards of the College of Whispers use this to their advantage. They appear to be like any other bard, sharing news, singing songs, and telling tales to the audiences they gather. In truth, the College of Whispers teaches its students that they are wolves among sheep. These bards use their knowledge and magic to uncover secrets and turn them against others through extortion and threats. Many other bards hate the College of Whispers, viewing it as a parasite that uses the bards’ reputation to acquire wealth and power. For this reason, these bards rarely reveal their true nature unless they must. They typically claim to follow some other college, or keep their true nature secret in order to better infiltrate and exploit royal courts and other settings of power.

3RD LEVEL: PSYCHIC BLADES
You gain the ability to make your weapon attacks magically toxic to a creature's mind. When you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration to deal an additional 2d6 psychic damage to that target. You can do so only once per round on your turn. The psychic damage increases when you reach certain levels in this class, increasing to 3d6 at 5th level, 5d6 at 10th level, and 8d6 at 15th level.

3RD LEVEL: WORDS OF TERROR
You learn to infuse innocent-seeming words with an insidious magic that can inspire terror. If you speak to a humanoid alone for at least 1 minute, you can attempt to seed paranoia and fear into its mind. At the end of the conversation, the target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC or be frightened of you or another creature of your choice. The target is frightened in this way for 1 hour, until it is attacked or damaged, or until it witnesses its allies being attacked or damaged. If the target succeeds on its saving throw, the target has no hint that you tried to frighten it. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a short rest or long rest.

6TH LEVEL: MANTLE OF WHISPERS
You gain the ability to adopt a humanoid's persona. When a humanoid dies within 30 feet of you, you can magically capture its shadow using your reaction. You retain this shadow until you use it or you finish a long rest. You can use the shadow as an action. When you do so, it vanishes, magically transforming into a disguise that appears on you. You now look like the dead person, but healthy and alive. This disguise lasts for 1 hour or until you end it as a bonus action. While you're in the disguise, you gain access to all information that the humanoid would freely share with a casual acquaintance. Such information includes general details on its background and personal life, but doesn't include secrets. The information is enough that you can pass yourself off as the person by drawing on its memories. Another creature can see through this disguise by succeeding on a Wisdom (Insight) check contested by your Charisma (Deception) check. You gain a +5 bonus to your check. Once you capture a shadow with this feature, you can't capture another one with it until you finish a short or long rest.

14TH LEVEL: SHADOW LORE
You gain the ability to weave dark magic into your words and tap into a creature’s deepest fears. As an action, you magically whisper a phrase that only one creature of your choice within 30 feet of you can hear. The target must make a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC. It automatically succeeds if it doesn’t share a language with you or if it can’t hear you. On a successful saving throw, your whisper sounds like unintelligible mumbling and has no effect. If the target fails its saving throw, it is charmed by you for the next 8 hours or until you or your allies attack or damage it. It interprets the whispers as a description of its most mortifying secret. While you gain no knowledge of this secret, the target is convinced you know it. While charmed in this way, the creature obeys your commands for fear that you will reveal its secret. It won’t risk its life for you or fight for you, unless it was already inclined to do so. It grants you favors and gifts it would offer to a close friend. When the effect ends, the creature has no understanding of why it held you in such fear. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a long rest.
=========================
CLERIC
Primary Ability: Wisdom

Clerics draw power from the realms of the gods and harness it to work miracles. Blessed by a deity, a pantheon, or another immortal entity, a Cleric can reach out to the divine magic of the Outer Planes—where gods dwell—and channel that energy to bolster people and to battle foes. Because their power is a divine gift, Clerics typically associate themselves with temples or shrines dedicated to whatever deity or other immortal force unlocked their magical ability.

Harnessing divine magic doesn’t rely on specific training, yet a Cleric might learn formulaic prayers and ancient rites that help them focus their minds and spirits on drawing power from the Outer Planes. Even a Cleric who declines to worship their divine benefactor might perform their benefactor’s rites if doing so helps the Cleric feel connected to the immortal realms. Not every acolyte or officiant at a temple or shrine is a Cleric. Some priests are called to a simple life of temple service, carrying out their devotion through prayer and rituals, not through magic. Some of the most influential high priests are incapable of harnessing divine magic, and a few of them feel threatened when a Cleric appears. Many can pray, and some mortals claim to speak for the gods. But few can marshal the power of those gods the way a Cleric can.

CREATING A CLERIC
To create a Cleric, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a 1st-level character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Cleric” section.

Then look at the Cleric table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. The descriptions of those features appear in the “Cleric Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d8 per Cleric level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Level after 1st: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills (Choose 2): History, Insight, Medicine, Persuasion, Religion
Weapons: Simple Weapons
Tools: None
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor, Medium Armor, Shields

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a 1st-level character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 110 GP on equipment of your choice.

Chain Shirt
Holy Symbol
Mace
Priest’s Pack
Shield
7 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE CLERIC
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Cleric as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Cleric’s primary ability, Wisdom, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you are already a Cleric.
Armor Training. When you gain your first Cleric level, you gain armor training with the following: Light Armor, Medium Armor, and Shields.
Spell Slots. Add all your Cleric levels to the appropriate levels from other classes to determine your available spell slots for casting spells, as detailed in the multiclassing rules. You prepare spells for each of your classes individually, referring to the spell slots of an individual class to determine the number and levels of the spells you prepare for it.
Channel Divinity. If you have more than one class with the Channel Divinity feature, a class’s uses of the feature can be expended only on that class’s Channel Divinity options.
CLERIC CLASS FEATURES
As a Cleric, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Cleric table.



1ST LEVEL: DIVINE ORDER
You have dedicated yourself to one of the following sacred roles of your choice:

Protector. Trained for battle, you gain proficiency with Martial Weapons and training with Heavy Armor.
Thaumaturge. You know one extra cantrip from the Cleric spell list (see your Spellcasting feature for information on preparing spells). In addition, your mystical connection to the divine gives you a bonus to your Intelligence (Arcana or Religion) checks. The bonus equals your Wisdom modifier (minimum of +1).
1ST LEVEL: SPELLCASTING
You have learned to cast spells through prayer and meditation. See the Player’s Handbook for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as a Cleric.

Cantrips. You know three cantrips of your choice from the Cleric spell list. Guidance, Sacred Flame, and Thaumaturgy are recommended. Whenever you gain a Cleric level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Cleric spell list. When you reach Cleric levels 4 and 10, you learn another cantrip of your choice from the Cleric spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Cleric table.
Spell Slots. The Cleric table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest.
Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four level 1 spells from the Cleric spell list. Bless, Cure Wounds, Guiding Bolt, and Shield of Faith are recommended. The number of spells on your list also increases as you gain Cleric levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Cleric table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Cleric spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a 3rd-level Cleric, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If another Cleric feature gives spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells on the list you prepare with this Spellcasting feature, but those spells otherwise follow the rules in this feature.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your list of prepared spells, replacing one or more of the spells there with other Divine spells for which you have spell slots. Preparing a new list requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell you add to the list.
Spellcasting Ability. Wisdom is your Spellcasting Ability for your Cleric spells.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Holy Symbol as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you prepare for this class.
2ND LEVEL: CHANNEL DIVINITY
You can channel divine energy directly from the Outer Planes to fuel magical effects. You start with two such effects: Divine Spark and Turn Undead, each of which is described below. Each time you use this class's Channel Divinity, choose which Channel Divinity effect from this class to create, and you gain additional effect options at higher levels in this class.

You can use this class's Channel Divinity twice. You gain additional effect options at higher Cleric levels. You regain one of its expended uses when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You gain additional uses when you reach certain Cleric levels, as shown in the Channel Divinity column of the Cleric table. If a Channel Divinity effect requires a saving throw, the DC equals the Spell Save DC from this class’s Spellcasting feature.

Divine Spark. As a Magic Action, you point your Holy Symbol at another creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself and focus divine energy at it. Roll 1d8 and add your Wisdom modifier. You either restore Hit Points to the creature equal to that total or force the creature to make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes Necrotic or Radiant damage (your choice) equal to that total. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage (round down). You roll an additional d8 when you reach Cleric levels 7 (2d8), 13 (3d8), and 18 (4d8).
Turn Undead. As a Magic Action, you present your Holy Symbol and censure Undead creatures. Each Undead within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom saving throw. If the creature fails its save, it has the Frightened and Incapacitated conditions for 1 minute. For that duration, it tries to move as far from you as it can on its turns. This effect ends early on the creature if it takes any damage, you have the Incapacitated condition, or you die.
3RD LEVEL: CLERIC SUBCLASS
You gain a Cleric subclass of your choice:

Life Domain
Light Domain
Trickery Domain
War Domain
Forge Domain (Non-Playtest)
Order Domain (Non-Playtest)
Peace Domain (Non-Playtest)
Twilight Domain (Non-Playtest)
A subclass is a specialization that grants you special abilities at certain Cleric levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Cleric level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

4TH LEVEL: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16.

5TH LEVEL: SEAR UNDEAD
Whenever you use Turn Undead, you can roll a number of d8s equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 1d8) and add the rolls together. Each Undead that fails its saving throw against that use of Turn Undead takes Radiant damage equal to the roll’s total. This damage doesn’t end the turn effect.

7TH LEVEL: BLESSED STRIKES
Divine power infuses you in battle. You gain one of the following options of your choice (If you get either option from a Cleric subclass in an older book, use only the option you chose for this feature):

Divine Strike. Once on each of your turns when you hit a creature with an attack roll using a weapon, you can cause the target to take an extra 1d8 Necrotic or Radiant damage (your choice).
Potent Spellcasting. You add your Wisdom modifier to the damage you deal with any Cleric cantrip.
10TH LEVEL: DIVINE INTERVENTION
You can call on your deity or pantheon to intervene on your behalf. As a Magic Action, choose any Cleric spell of 5th level or lower that doesn’t require a Reaction to cast. As part of the same action, you cast that spell without expending a spell slot or needing Material components. You then can’t use this feature again until you finish a Long Rest.

14TH LEVEL: IMPROVED BLESSED STRIKES
The option you chose for Blessed Strikes grows more powerful:

Divine Strike. The extra damage of your Divine Strike increases to 2d8.
Potent Spellcasting. When you cast a Cleric cantrip and deal damage to a creature with it, you can give vitality to yourself or another creature within 60 feet of yourself, granting a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to twice your Wisdom modifier.
19TH LEVEL: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Fate is recommended.

20TH LEVEL: GREATER DIVINE INTERVENTION
You can call on even more powerful divine intervention. When you use your Divine Intervention feature, you can choose Wish when you select a spell. If you do so, you can’t use Divine Intervention again until you finish 2d4 Long Rests.

---------------------------
LIFE DOMAIN
The Life Domain focuses on the vibrant positive energy—one of the fundamental forces of the multiverse—that sustains all life. Clerics who tap into this domain are masters of healing, using that force of life to cure many hurts. Existence itself relies on the positive energy associated with this domain, so a Cleric of any religious tradition might choose it. This domain is associated with agricultural deities, sun gods, gods of healing or endurance, and gods of home and community. Religious orders of healing also seek the powers of this domain.

3RD LEVEL: DOMAIN SPELLS
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Life Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

LIFE DOMAIN SPELLS
Cleric Level	Prepared Spells
3rd	Aid, Bless, Cure Wounds, Lesser Restoration
5th	Mass Healing Word, Revivify
7th	Aura of Life, Death Ward
9th	Greater Restoration, Mass Cure Wounds
3RD LEVEL: DISCIPLE OF LIFE
When a spell you cast with a spell slot restores Hit Points to a creature, that creature regains additional Hit Points on the turn you cast the spell. The additional Hit Points equal 2 + the spell slot’s level.

3RD LEVEL: PRESERVE LIFE
As a Magic Action, you present your Holy Symbol and expend a use of your Channel Divinity to evoke healing energy that can restore a number of Hit Points equal to five times your Cleric level. Choose Bloodied creatures within 30 feet of yourself (which can include you), and divide those Hit Points among them. This feature can restore a creature to no more than half its Hit Point Maximum.

6TH LEVEL: BLESSED HEALER
The healing spells you cast on others heal you as well. Immediately after you cast a spell with a spell slot that restores Hit Points to one creature other than yourself, you regain Hit Points equal to 2 plus the spell slot’s level.

17TH LEVEL: SUPREME HEALING
When you would normally roll one or more dice to restore Hit Points to a creature with a spell or Channel Divinity, don’t roll those dice for the healing; instead use the highest number possible for each die. For example, instead of restoring 2d6 Hit Points to a creature with a spell, you restore 12.
---------------------------
LIGHT DOMAIN
The Light Domain emphasizes the divine power to bring about blazing fire and revelation. Clerics who wield this power are enlightened souls infused with radiance and the power of their deities’ discerning vision, charged with chasing away lies and burning away darkness. The Light Domain is associated with gods of truth, vigilance, beauty, insight, and renewal. Some of these gods are identified with the sun or as charioteers who guide the sun across the sky. Others are sentinels who pierce every shadow and deception. Some are deities of beauty and artistry, who teach that art is a vehicle for the soul’s improvement. Religious orders focused on combating the Undead also draw on the power of this domain.

3RD LEVEL: DOMAIN SPELLS
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Light Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

LIGHT DOMAIN SPELLS
Cleric Level	Prepared Spells
3rd	Burning Hands, Faerie Fire, Scorching Ray, See Invisibility
5th	Daylight, Fireball
7th	Arcane Eye, Wall of Fire
9th	Flame Strike, Scrying
3RD LEVEL: RADIANCE OF THE DAWN
As a Magic action, you present your Holy Symbol and expend a use of your Channel Divinity to emit a flash of light in a 30-foot Emanation originating from yourself. Any magical darkness—such as that created by the Darkness spell—in that area is dispelled. Additionally, each creature of your choice in that area must make a Constitution saving throw, taking Radiant damage equal to 2d10 + your Cleric level on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.

3RD LEVEL: WARDING FLARE
When a creature that you can see within 30 feet of yourself makes an attack roll, you can take a Reaction to impose Disadvantage on the attack roll, causing light to flare before it hits or misses. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

6TH LEVEL: IMPROVED WARDING FLARE
You regain all expended uses of your Warding Flare when you finish a Short or Long Rest. In addition, whenever you use Warding Flare, you can give the target of the triggering attack a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to 2d6 + your Wisdom modifier.

17TH LEVEL: CORONA OF LIGHT
As a Magic action, you cause yourself to emit an aura of sunlight that lasts for 1 minute or until you dismiss it (no action required). You emit Bright Light in a 60-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet. Your enemies in the Bright Light have Disadvantage on saving throws against your Radiance of the Dawn and any spell that deals Fire or Radiant damage. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.
---------------------------
TRICKERY DOMAIN
The Trickery Domain offers magic of deception, illusion, and stealth. Clerics who wield this magic are a disruptive force in the world, puncturing pride, mocking tyrants, stealing from the rich, freeing captives, and flouting hollow traditions. They prefer subterfuge, pranks, and theft rather than direct confrontation. Gods of trickery are mischief-makers and instigators who stand as a constant challenge to the accepted order among both gods and mortals. They embody the forces of change and social upheaval, and they’re patrons of thieves, scoundrels, gamblers, rebels, and liberators. Religious orders that operate in secret, especially those that seek to undermine oppressive governments or hierarchies, also draw on the power of the Trickery Domain.

3RD LEVEL: DOMAIN SPELLS
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Trickery Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

TRICKERY DOMAIN SPELLS
Cleric Level	Prepared Spells
3rd	Charm Person, Disguise Self, Invisibility, Pass without Trace
5th	Hypnotic Pattern, Nondetection
7th	Confusion, Dimension Door
9th	Dominate Person, Modify Memory
3RD LEVEL: BLESSING OF THE TRICKSTER
As a Magic Action, you can choose yourself or a willing creature within 30 feet of yourself to gain Advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. This blessing lasts until you finish a Long Rest or until you use this feature again.

3RD LEVEL: INVOKE DUPLICITY
As a Bonus Action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to create a perfect visual illusion of yourself in an unoccupied space within 30 feet of yourself. The illusion is intangible and doesn't occupy its space. It lasts for 1 minute, but it ends early if you dismiss it (no action required) or have the Incapacitated condition. The illusion is animated and mimics your expressions and gestures. While the illusion persists, you gain the following benefits:

Cast Spells. You can cast spells as though you were in the illusion’s space, but you must use your own senses.
Distract. When both you and your illusion are within 5 feet of a creature that can see the illusion, you have Advantage on attack rolls against that creature, given how distracting the illusion is to the target.
Move. As a Bonus Action, you can move the illusion up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see that is within 120 feet of yourself.
6TH LEVEL: TRICKSTER’S TRANSPOSITION
Whenever you take the Bonus Action to create or move the illusion of your Invoke Duplicity, you can teleport, swapping places with the illusion.

17TH LEVEL: IMPROVED DUPLICITY
The illusion of your Invoke Duplicity has grown more powerful in the following ways:

Shared Distraction. When you and your allies make attack rolls against a creature within 5 feet of the illusion, the attack rolls have Advantage.
Healing Illusion. When the illusion ends, you or a creature of your choice within 5 feet of it regains a number of Hit Points equal to your Cleric level.
---------------------------
WAR DOMAIN
War has many manifestations. It can make heroes of ordinary people. It can be desperate and horrific, with acts of cruelty and cowardice eclipsing instances of excellence and courage. Clerics who tap into the magic of the War Domain excel in battle, inspiring others to fight the good fight or offering acts of violence as prayers. Gods of the War Domain watch over warriors and reward them for their great deeds. They include champions of honor and chivalry as well as gods of destruction and pillage. Other war gods take a more neutral stance, promoting war in all its manifestations and supporting warriors in any circumstance.

3RD LEVEL: DOMAIN SPELLS
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the War Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

WAR DOMAIN SPELLS
Cleric Level	Prepared Spells
3rd	Guiding Bolt, Magic Weapon, Shield of Faith, Spiritual Weapon
5th	Crusader’s Mantle, Spirit Guardians
7th	Fire Shield, Freedom of Movement
9th	Hold Monster, Steel Wind Strike
3RD LEVEL: GUIDED STRIKE
When you or a creature within 30 feet of you misses with an attack roll, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity and give that roll a +10 bonus, potentially causing it to hit. When you use this feature to benefit another creature's attack roll, you must take a Reaction to do so.

3RD LEVEL: WAR PRIEST
As a Bonus Action, you can make one attack with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike. You can use this Bonus Action a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest.

6TH LEVEL: WAR GOD’S BLESSING
You can expend a use of your Channel Divinity to cast Shield of Faith or Spiritual Weapon rather then expending a spell slot. When you cast either spell this way, the spell doesn't require Concentration. Instead the spell lasts for 1 minute, but it ends early if you: cast that spell again, have the Incapacitated condition or die.

17TH LEVEL: AVATAR OF BATTLE
You gain Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage.
---------------------------
Forge Domain
Clerics of the forge are oft artisans who work with metal, from a humble blacksmith who keeps a village in horseshoes and plow blades to the mighty elf artisan whose diamond-tipped arrows of mithral have felled demon lords. Clerics of the forge believe that, with patience and hard work, even the most intractable metal can be transformed from a lump of ore to a beautifully wrought object. These Clerics search for objects lost to the forces of darkness, liberate mines overrun by orcs, and uncover rare and wondrous materials necessary to create potent magic items. They take great pride in their work, and they are willing to craft and use heavy armor and powerful weapons to protect them.

3RD LEVEL: DOMAIN SPELLS
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Forge Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

Forge Domain Spells
Cleric Level	Spells
3rd	Identify, Searing Smite, Heat Metal, Magic Weapon
5th	Elemental Weapon, Protection from Energy
7th	Fabricate, Wall of Fire
9th	Animate Objects, Creation
3RD LEVEL: BONUS PROFICIENCY
You gain proficiency with heavy armor and smith's tools.

3RD LEVEL: BLESSING OF THE FORGE
You gain the ability to imbue magic into a weapon or armor. At the end of a long rest, you can touch one non-magical object that is a suit of armor or a simple or martial weapon. Until the end of your next long rest or until you die, the object becomes a magic item, granting a +1 bonus to AC if it’s armor or a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls if it’s a weapon. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a long rest.

3RD LEVEL: ARTISAN'S BLESSING
You can use your Channel Divinity to create simple items. You conduct an hour-long ritual that crafts a non-magical item that must include some metal: a simple or martial weapon, a suit of armor, ten pieces of ammunition, a set of tools, or another metal object. The creation is completed at the end of the hour, coalescing in an unoccupied space of your choice on a surface within 5 feet of you. The thing you create can be something that is worth no more than 100 gp. As part of this ritual, you must lay out metal, which can include coins, with a value equal to the creation. The metal irretrievably coalesces and transforms into the creation at the ritual’s end, magically forming even nonmetal parts of the creation. The ritual can create a duplicate of a non-magical item that contains metal, such as a key, if you possess the original during the ritual.

6TH LEVEL: SOUL OF THE FORGE
Your mastery of the forge grants you special abilities:

You gain resistance to fire damage.
While wearing heavy armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC.
8TH LEVEL: DIVINE STRIKE
17TH LEVEL: SAINT OF FORGE AND FIRE
Your blessed affinity with fire and metal becomes more powerful:

You gain immunity to fire damage.
While wearing heavy armor, you have resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from non-magical attacks.
---------------------------
Order Domain
The Order Domain represents discipline, as well as devotion to the laws that govern a society, an institution, or a philosophy. Clerics of Order meditate on logic and justice as they serve their domain. Clerics of Order believe that well-crafted laws establish legitimate hierarchies, and those selected by law to lead must be obeyed. Those who obey must do so to the best of their ability, and if those who lead fail to protect the law, they must be replaced. In this manner, law weaves a web of obligations that create order and security in a chaotic multiverse.

3RD LEVEL: DOMAIN SPELLS
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Order Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

Order Domain Spells
Cleric Level	Spells
3rd	Command, Heroism, Hold Person, Zone of Truth
5th	Mass Healing Word, Slow
7th	Compulsion, Locate Creature
9th	Commune, Dominate Person
3RD LEVEL: BONUS PROFICIENCIES
You gain proficiency with heavy armor. You also gain proficiency in the Intimidation or Persuasion skill (your choice).

3RD LEVEL: VOICE OF AUTHORITY
You can invoke the power of law to embolden an ally to attack. If you cast a spell with a spell slot of 1st level or higher and target an ally with the spell, that ally can use their reaction immediately after the spell to make one weapon attack against a creature of your choice that you can see. If the spell targets more than one ally, you choose the ally who can make the attack.

3RD LEVEL: ORDER'S DEMAND
You can use your Channel Divinity to exert an intimidating presence over others. As an action, you present your holy symbol, and each creature of your choice that can see or hear you within 30 feet of you must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by you until the end of your next turn or until the charmed creature takes any damage. You can also cause any of the charmed creatures to drop what they are holding when they fail the saving throw.

6TH LEVEL: EMBODIMENT OF THE LAW
You become remarkably adept at channeling magical energy to compel others. If you cast a spell of the enchantment school using a spell slot of 1st level or higher, you can change the spell's casting time to 1 bonus action for this casting, provided the spell's casting time is normally 1 action. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

17TH LEVEL: ORDER'S WRATH
Enemies you designate for destruction wilt under the combined efforts of you and your allies. If you deal your Divine Strike damage to a creature on your turn, you can curse that creature until the start of your next turn. The next time one of your allies hits the cursed creature with an attack, the target also takes 2d8 psychic damage, and the curse ends. You can curse a creature in this way only once per turn.
---------------------------
Peace Domain
The balm of peace thrives at the heart of healthy communities, between friendly nations, and in the souls of the kindhearted. Clerics of peace inspire people of all sorts to resolve conflict and to stand up against those forces that try to prevent peace from flourishing. Clerics of the Peace Domain preside over the signing of treaties, and they are often asked to arbitrate in disputes. These clerics' blessings draw people together and help them shoulder one another's burdens, and the clerics' magic aids those who are driven to fight for the way of peace.

3RD LEVEL: DOMAIN SPELLS
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Peace Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

Peace Domain Spells
Cleric Level	Spells
3rd	Heroism, Sanctuary, Aid, Warding Bond
5th	Beacon of Hope, Sending
7th	Aura of Purity, Otiluke's Resilient Sphere
9th	Greater Restoration, Rary's Telepathic Bond
3RD LEVEL: IMPLEMENT OF PEACE
You gain proficiency in the Insight, Performance, or Persuasion skill (your choice).

3RD LEVEL: EMBOLDENING BOND
You can forge an empowering bond among people who are at peace with one another. As an action, you choose a number of willing creatures within 30 feet of you (this can include yourself) equal to your proficiency bonus. You create a magical bond among them for 10 minutes or until you use this feature again. While any bonded creature is within 30 feet of another, the creature can roll a d4 and add the number rolled to an attack roll, an ability check, or a saving throw it makes. Each creature can add the d4 no more than once per turn. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

3RD LEVEL: BALM OF PEACE
You can use your Channel Divinity to make your very presence a soothing balm. As an action, you can move up to your speed, without provoking opportunity attacks, and when you move within 5 feet of any other creature during this action, you can restore a number of hit points to that creature equal to 2d6 + your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 1 hit point). A creature can receive this healing only once whenever you take this action.

6TH LEVEL: PROTECTIVE BOND
The bond you forge between people helps them protect each other. When a creature affected by your Emboldening Bond feature is about to take damage, a second bonded creature within 30 feet of the first can use its reaction to teleport to an unoccupied space within 5 feet of the first creature. The second creature then takes all the damage instead.

17TH LEVEL: EXPANSIVE BOND
The benefits of your Emboldening Bond and Protective Bond features now work when the creatures are within 60 feet of each other. Moreover, when a creature uses Protective Bond to take someone else's damage, the creature has resistance to that damage.
---------------------------
Twilight Domain
The twilit transition from light into darkness often brings calm and even joy, as the day's labors end and the hours of rest begin. The darkness can also bring terrors, but the Clerics of twilight guard against the horrors of the night. Clerics who serve these domains bring comfort to those who seek rest and protect them by venturing into the encroaching darkness to ensure that the dark is a comfort, not a terror.

3RD LEVEL: DOMAIN SPELLS
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Twilight Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

Twilight Domain Spells
Cleric Level	Spells
3rd	Faerie Fire, Sleep, Moonbeam, See Invisibility
5th	Aura of Vitality, Leomund's Tiny Hut
7th	Aura of Life, Greater Invisibility
9th	Circle of Power, Mislead
3RD LEVEL: BONUS PROFICIENCIES
You gain proficiency with martial weapons and heavy armor.

3RD LEVEL: EYES OF NIGHT
You can see through the deepest gloom. You have darkvision out to a range of 300 feet. In that radius, you can see in dim light as if it were bright light and in darkness as if it were dim light. As an action, you can magically share the darkvision of this feature with willing creatures you can see within 10 feet of you, up to a number of creatures equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of one creature). The shared darkvision lasts for 1 hour. Once you share it, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend a spell slot of any level to share it again.

3RD LEVEL: VIGILANT BLESSING
The night has taught you to be vigilant. As an action, you give one creature you touch (including possibly yourself) advantage on the next initiative roll the creature makes. This benefit ends immediately after the roll or if you use this feature again.

3RD LEVEL: TWILIGHT SANCTUARY
You can use your Channel Divinity to refresh your allies with soothing twilight. As an action, you present your holy symbol, and a sphere of twilight emanates from you. The sphere is centered on you, has a 30-foot radius, and is filled with dim light. The sphere moves with you, and it lasts for 1 minute or until you are incapacitated or die. Whenever a creature (including you) ends its turn in the sphere, you can grant that creature one of these benefits:

You grant it temporary hit points equal to 1d6 plus your cleric level.
You end one effect on it causing it to be charmed or frightened.
6TH LEVEL: STEPS OF NIGHT
You can draw on the mystical power of night to rise into the air. As a bonus action when you are in dim light or darkness, you can magically give yourself a flying speed equal to your walking speed for 1 minute. You can use this bonus action a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

17TH LEVEL: TWILIGHT SHROUD
The twilight that you summon offers a protective embrace: you and your allies have half cover while in the sphere created by your Twilight Sanctuary.
=========================
DRUID
Primary Ability: Wisdom

Druids belong to ancient orders that call on the forces of nature. Harnessing the magic of animals, plants, weather, and the four elements, Druids can heal, transform themselves, and wield elemental destruction.

Revering nature above all, individual Druids gain their magic from a nature deity, from nature itself, or both, and they typically unite with other Druids in performing rites to mark the passage of the seasons and other natural cycles. The ancient druidic traditions are sometimes called the Old Faith, in contrast to the worship of gods in temples and shrines.

Druids master Primal magic, which is oriented toward nature and animals—the power of tooth and claw, of sun and moon, of fire and storm. Druids also gain the ability to take on animal forms, and some Druids focus on this practice, even to the point where they feel more natural in an animal form.

For Druids, nature exists in a precarious balance. The four elements that make up a world—air, earth, fire, and water—must remain in equilibrium. If one element were to gain power over the others, the world could be destroyed, drawn into one of the elemental planes and broken apart into its component elements. Thus, Druids oppose cults of Elemental Evil and others who promote one element to the exclusion of others. Druids are also concerned with the delicate ecological balance that sustains plant and animal life and with the need for people to live in harmony with nature, not in opposition to it.

Druids are often found guarding sacred sites or watching over regions of unspoiled nature. But when a significant danger arises, threatening nature’s balance or the lands they protect, Druids take a more active role as adventurers who combat the threat.

CREATING A DRUID
To create a Druid, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a 1st-level character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Druid” sidebar.

Then look at the Druid table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. The descriptions of those features appear in the “Druid Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d8 per Druid level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Level after 1st: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Intelligence, Wisdom
Skills (Choose 2): Arcana, Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception, Religion, Survival
Weapons: Simple Weapons
Tools: Herbalism Kit
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor, Shields

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a 1st-level character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 50 GP on equipment of your choice.

Druidic Focus (Quarterstaff)
Explorer’s Pack
Herbalism Kit
Leather Armor
Shield
Sickle
9 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE DRUID
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Druid as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Druid’s primary ability, Wisdom, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you are already a Druid.
Armor Training. When you gain your first Druid level, you gain armor training with the following: Light Armor and Shields.
Spell Slots. Add all your Druid levels to the appropriate levels from other classes to determine your available spell slots for casting spells, as detailed in the multiclassing rules. You prepare spells for each of your classes individually, referring to the spell slots of an individual class to determine the number and levels of the spells you prepare for it.
DRUID CLASS FEATURES
As a Druid, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Druid table.



1ST LEVEL: DRUIDIC
You know Druidic, the secret language of Druids. While learning this ancient tongue, you also unlocked the magic of communicating to animals; you always have the Speak with Animals spell prepared. You can use Druidic to leave hidden messages. You and others who know Druidic automatically spot such a message. Others spot the message’s presence with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check but can’t decipher it without magic.

1ST LEVEL: PRIMAL ORDER
You have dedicated yourself to one of the following sacred roles of your choice:

Magician. You know one extra cantrip from the Druid spell list. In addition, your mystical connection to nature gives you a bonus to your Intelligence (Arcana or Nature) checks. The bonus equals your Wisdom modifier (minimum bonus of +1).
Warden. Trained for battle, you gain proficiency with Martial weapons and training with Medium Armor.
1ST LEVEL: SPELLCASTING
You have learned to cast spells through studying the mystical forces of nature. See the Player’s Handbook for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as a Druid.

Cantrips. You know two cantrips of your choice from the Druid spell list. Druidcraft and Produce Flame are recommended. Whenever you gain a Druid level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Druid spell list. When you reach 4th and 10th level in this class, you learn another cantrip of your choice from the Druid spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Druid table.
Spell Slots. The Druid table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest.
Prepared Spells of 1st+ Level. You prepare the list of spells of 1st level and higher that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four 1st-level spells from the Druid spell list. Animal Friendship, Cure Wounds, Faerie Fire, and Thunderwave are recommended. The number of spells on your list also increases as you gain Druid levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Druid table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Druid spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a 3rd-level Druid, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If another Druid feature gives spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells on the list you prepare with this Spellcasting feature, but those spells otherwise follow the rules in this feature.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your list of prepared spells, replacing one or more of the spells there with other Druid spells for which you have spell slots. Preparing a new list requires time spent in meditation: at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell you add to the list.
Spellcasting Ability. Wisdom is your Spellcasting Ability for your Druid spells.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you prepare for this class.
2ND LEVEL: WILD COMPANION
You can summon a nature spirit that assumes an animal form to aid you. As a Magic action, you can expend a spell slot or a use of Wild Shape to cast the Find Familiar spell without Material components. When you cast the spell in this way, the familiar is a Fey and disappears when you finish a Long Rest.

2ND LEVEL: WILD SHAPE
The power of nature allows you to assume the form of an animal. As a Bonus Action, you shape-shift into a Beast form that you have learned for this feature (see “Known Forms” below). You stay in that form for a number of hours equal to half your Druid level or until you use Wild Shape again, have the Incapacitated condition, or die. You can also leave the form early as a Bonus Action.

Number of Uses. You can use Wild Shape twice. You regain one expended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You gain additional uses when you reach certain Druid levels, as shown in the Wild Shape column of the Druid table.
Known Forms. You know four Beast forms for this feature, chosen from among Beast stat blocks that have a maximum Challenge Rating of 1/4 and that lack a Fly Speed. Rat, Riding Horse, Spider, and Wolf are recommended. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one of your known forms with another eligible form. When you gain certain Druid levels, the number of known forms and the maximum Challenge Rating for those forms increases, as shown in the Beast Shapes table. In addition, starting at level 8, you can adopt a form that has a Fly Speed. When choosing a new form, you may look in the Monster Manual or elsewhere for eligible Beasts if the DM permits you to do so.
Beast Shapes
Druid Level	Known Forms	Max CR	Fly Speed
2	4	1/4	No
4	6	1/2	No
8	8	1	Yes
Rules While Transformed. While in a form, you retain your personality, memories, and ability to speak, and the following rules apply:
Temporary Hit Points. When you assume a Wild Shape form, you gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to your Druid level.
Game Statistics. Your game statistics are replaced by the Beast's stat block, but you retain your creature type; Hit Points; Hit Dice; Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores; class features; languages; and feats. You also retain your skill and saving throw proficiencies and use your Proficiency Bonus for them, in addition to gaining the proficiencies of the creature. If a skill or saving throw modifier in the Beast's stat block is higher than yours, use the one in the stat block.
No Spellcasting. You can’t cast spells, but shape-shifting doesn’t break your Concentration or otherwise interfere with a spell you’ve already cast.
Objects. Your ability to handle objects is determined by the form's limbs rather than your own. In addition, you choose whether your equipment falls in your space, merges into your new form or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as normal, but the DM decides whether it's practical for the new form to wear a piece of equipment based on the creature's size and shape. Your equipment doesn't change size or shape to match the new form and any equipment that the new form can't wear must either fall to the ground or merge with the form. Equipment that merges with the form has no effect while you're in that form.
3RD LEVEL: DRUID SUBCLASS
You gain a Druid subclass of your choice:

Circle of the Land
Circle of the Moon
Circle of the Sea
Circle of Stars
Circle of Dreams (Non-Playtest)
Circle of the Shepherd (Non-Playtest)
Circle of Spores (Non-Playtest)
Circle of Wildfire (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description (for this playtest, use Circle of Stars from Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything). A subclass is a specialization that grants you special abilities at certain Druid levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Druid level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Druid table, you gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16.

5TH LEVEL: WILD RESURGENCE
Once on each of your turns, if you have no uses of Wild Shape left, you can give yourself one use by expending a spell slot (no action required). In addition, you can expend one use of Wild Shape (no action required) to give yourself a 1st-level spell slot, and you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest.

7TH LEVEL: ELEMENTAL FURY
The might of the elements flows through you. You gain one of the following options of your choice:

Potent Spellcasting. Add your Wisdom modifier to the damage you deal with any Druid cantrip.
Primal Strike. Once on each of your turns when you hit a creature with an attack roll using a weapon or a Beast form’s attack in Wild Shape, you can cause the target to take an extra 1d8 Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder damage (choose when you hit).
9TH LEVEL: COMMUNE WITH NATURE
You are an expression of nature itself and can commune with the natural world all around you; you always have the Commune with Nature spell prepared.

15TH LEVEL: IMPROVED ELEMENTAL FURY
The option you chose for Elemental Fury grows more powerful:

Potent Spellcasting. When you cast a Druid cantrip with a range of 10 feet or greater, the spell’s range increases by 300 feet.
Primal Strike. The extra damage of your Primal Strike increases to 2d8.
18TH LEVEL: BEAST SPELLS
While using Wild Shape, you can cast spells in Beast form, except for any spell that has a Material component with a cost specified or that consumes its Material component.

19TH LEVEL: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Dimensional Travel is recommended.

20TH LEVEL: ARCHDRUID
The vitality of nature constantly blooms within you, granting you the following benefits:

Evergreen Wild Shape. Whenever you roll Initiative and have no uses of Wild Shape left, you regain one expended use of it.
Nature Magician. You can convert uses of Wild Shape into a spell slot (no action required). Choose a number of your unexpended uses of Wild Shape and convert them into a single spell slot, with each use contributing 2 spell levels. For example, if you convert two uses of Wild Shape, you produce a 4th-level spell slot. Once you use this benefit, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest.
Longevity. The primal magic that you wield causes you to age more slowly. For every 10 years that pass, your body ages only 1 year.
---------------------------
CIRCLE OF THE LAND
The Circle of the Land is made up of mystics and sages who safeguard ancient knowledge and rites through a vast oral tradition. These Druids meet within sacred circles of trees or standing stones to whisper primal secrets in Druidic. The circle’s wisest members preside as the chief priests of communities that hold to the Old Faith and serve as advisors to the rulers of those folk.

3RD LEVEL: CIRCLE OF THE LAND SPELLS
Whenever you finish a Long Rest, choose one type of land: arid, polar, temperate, or tropical. Consult the table below that corresponds to the chosen type; you have the spells listed for your Druid level and lower prepared.

ARID LAND
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3rd	Blur, Burning Hands, Fire Bolt
5th	Fireball
7th	Blight
9th	Wall of Stone
POLAR LAND
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3rd	Fog Cloud, Hold Person, Ray of Frost
5th	Sleet Storm
7th	Ice Storm
9th	Cone of Cold
TEMPERATE LAND
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3rd	Misty Step, Shocking Grasp, Sleep
5th	Lightning Bolt
7th	Freedom of Movement
9th	Tree Stride
TROPICAL LAND
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3rd	Acid Splash, Ray of Sickness, Web
5th	Stinking Cloud
7th	Polymorph
9th	Insect Plague
3RD LEVEL: LAND’S AID
As a Magic action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape and choose a point within 60 feet of yourself. Vitality-giving flowers and life-draining thorns appear for a moment in a 10-foot-radius sphere centered on that point. Each creature of your choice in that area must make a Constitution saving throw against your spell save DC, taking 2d6 Necrotic damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. One creature of your choice in that area regains 2d6 Hit Points. The damage and healing increase by 1d6: 10th level (3d6) and 14th level (4d6).

6TH LEVEL: NATURAL RECOVERY
You can cast one of the level 1+ spells that you have prepared from your Circle Spells feature without expending a spell slot, and you must finish a Long Rest before you do so again. In addition, when you finish a Short Rest, you can choose expended spell slots to recover. The spell slots can have a combined level that is equal to or less than half your Druid level (round up), and none them can be 6th level or higher. For example, if you’re a 6th-level Druid, you can recover up to three levels worth of spell slots. You can recover a 3rd-level spell slot, a 2nd-level spell slot and a 1st-level spell slot, or three 1st-level spell slots. Once you recover spell slots with this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest.

10TH LEVEL: NATURE’S WARD
You are immune to the Poisoned condition, and you have resistance to a damage type associated with your current land choice in the Circle Spells feature, as shown in the Nature’s Ward table.

NATURE’S WARD
Land Type	Resistance
Arid	Fire
Polar	Cold
Temperate	Lightning
Tropical	Poison
14TH LEVEL: NATURE’S SANCTUARY
As a Magic action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape and cause spectral trees and vines to appear in a 15-foot cube on ground within 120 feet of yourself. They last there for 1 minute or until you have the Incapacitated condition or die. You and your allies have Half Cover while in that area, and your allies gain the current damage resistance of your Nature’s Ward while there. As a Bonus Action, you can move the cube up to 60 feet to ground within 120 feet of yourself.
---------------------------
CIRCLE OF THE MOON
Druids of the Circle of the Moon draw on the magic of the moon to transform themselves and to guard the wilds. Their order gathers under the full moon to share news and perform rituals. They wander the deepest parts of the wilderness, where they might go for weeks before crossing paths with another person, let alone another Druid. Changeable as the moon, a Druid of this circle might prowl as a great cat one night, soar over the treetops as an eagle the next day, and crash through the undergrowth as a bear to drive off a trespassing monster. The wild is in the Druid’s blood.

LEVEL 3: CIRCLE OF THE MOON SPELLS
When you reach a Druid level specified in the Circle of the Moon Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. In addition, you can cast the spells from this feature while you are in Wild Shape form.

CIRCLE OF THE MOON SPELLS
Druid Level	Prepared Spells
3	Cure Wounds, Moonbeam, Starry Wisp
5	Conjure Animals
7	Fount of Moonlight
9	Mass Cure Wounds
LEVEL 3: CIRCLE FORMS
You can channel lunar magic when you assume a Wild Shape form, granting you the benefits below:

Challenge Rating. The maximum Challenge Rating for the form equals your Druid level divided by 3 (round down).
Armor Class. Until you leave the form, your AC equals 13 plus your Wisdom modifier if that total is higher than the Beast's AC.
Temporary Hit Points. You gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to three times your Druid level.
LEVEL 6: IMPROVED CIRCLE FORMS
While in a Wild Shape form, you gain the following benefits:

Lunar Radiance. Each of your attacks in a Wild Shape form can deal its normal damage type or Radiant damage. You make this choice each time you hit with those attacks.
Increased Toughness. You can add your Wisdom modifier to your Constitution saving throws.
LEVEL 10: MOONLIGHT STEP
You magically transport yourself, reappearing amid a burst of moonlight. As a Bonus Action, you teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see, and you have Advantage on the next attack roll you make before the end of this turn. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You can also regain uses by expending a level 2+ spell slot for each use you want to restore (no action required).

LEVEL 14: LUNAR FORM
The power of the moon suffuses you, granting you the following benefits:

Improved Lunar Radiance. Once per turn, you can deal an extra 2d10 Radiant damage to a target you hit with a Wild Shape form's attack.
Shared Moonlight. Whenever you use Moonlight Step, you can also teleport one willing creature. That creature must be within 10 feet of you, and you teleport it to an unoccupied space you can see within 10 feet of your destination space.
---------------------------
CIRCLE OF THE SEA
Druids of the Circle of the Sea draw on the tempestuous natural forces of the world’s oceans and storms. Some view themselves as embodiments of nature’s wrath, seeking vengeance against those who despoil the natural world. Others seek mystical unity with nature by attuning themselves to the ebb and flow of the tides, following the rush of currents and waves, and listening to the inscrutable whispers and roars of the winds.

3RD LEVEL: CIRCLE OF THE SEA SPELLS
Your connection to this circle ensures that you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Druid level specified in the Circle of the Sea Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

CIRCLE OF THE SEA SPELLS
Druid Level	Prepared Spells
3rd	Fog Cloud, Gust of Wind, Ray of Frost, Shatter, Thunderwave
5th	Lightning Bolt, Water Breathing
7th	Control Water, Ice Storm
9th	Conjure Elemental, Hold Monster
3RD LEVEL: WRATH OF THE SEA
As a Bonus Action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape to manifest a 5-foot Emanation that takes the form of ocean spray that surrounds you for 10 minutes. It ends early if you have the Incapacitated condition, dismiss it (no action required), or manifest it again.

When you manifest the Emanation and as a Bonus Action on your subsequent turns, you can choose another creature you can see in the Emanation. The target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against your Spell Save DC or take Cold damage and, if the creature is Large or smaller, be pushed up to 15 feet away from you. To determine this damage, roll a number of d6s equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of one die).

6TH LEVEL: AQUATIC AFFINITY
The size of the Emanation created by your Wrath of the Sea increases to 10 feet. In addition, you gain a Swim Speed equal to your Speed.

10TH LEVEL: STORMBORN
Your Wrath of the Sea confers two more benefits while active:

Flight. You gain a Fly Speed equal to your Speed.
Resistance. You have resistance to Cold, Lighting, and Thunder damage.
14TH LEVEL: OCEANIC GIFT
Instead of manifesting the Emanation of Wrath of the Sea around yourself, you can manifest it around one willing creature within 60 feet of yourself. That creature gains all the benefits of Emanation and uses your Spell Save DC and Wisdom modifier for it. In addition, you can manifest the Emanation around both the other creature and yourself if you expend two uses of your Wild Shape, instead of one, when manifesting it.
---------------------------
Circle of Stars
The Circle of Stars allows druids to draw on the power of starlight. These druids have tracked heavenly patterns since time immemorial, discovering secrets hidden amid the constellations. By revealing and understanding these secrets, the Circle of the Stars seeks to harness the powers of the cosmos. Many druids of this circle keep records of the constellations and the stars' effects on the world. Some groups document these observations at megalithic sites, which serve as enigmatic libraries of lore. These repositories might take the form of stone circles, pyramids, petroglyphs, and underground temples any construction durable enough to protect the circle's sacred knowledge even against a great cataclysm

3RD LEVEL: STAR MAP
You've created a star chart as part of your heavenly studies. It is a Tiny object and you can use it as a Spellcasting Focus for your Druid spells. You determine its form by rolling on the Star Map or by choosing one. While holding the map, you have the Guidance and Guiding Bolt spells prepared and you can cast Guiding Bolt without expending a spell slot. You can cast it in that way a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once) and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

If you lose the map, you can perform a 1-hour ceremony to magically create a replacement. This ceremony can be performed during a short or long rest, and it destroys the previous map.

Star Map
1d6	Map Form
1	A scroll covered with depictions of constellations
2	A stone tablet with fine holes drilled through it
3	A speckled owlbear hide, tooled with stellar symbols
4	A collection of maps bound in an ebony cover
5	A crystal engraved with starry patterns
6	Glass disks etched with constellations
3RD LEVEL: STARRY FORM
As a Bonus Action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape feature to take on a starry form, rather than shape-shifting. While in your starry form, you retain your game statistics, but your body becomes luminous; your joints glimmer like stars, and glowing lines connect them as on a star chart. This form sheds Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. The form lasts for 10 minutes. It ends early if you dismiss it (no action required), have the Incapacitated condition, or use this feature again.

Whenever you assume your starry form, choose which of the following constellations glimmers on your body; your choice gives you certain benefits while in the form:

Archer. A constellation of an archer appears on you. When you activate this form, and as a Bonus Action on your subsequent turns while it lasts, you can make a ranged spell attack, hurling a luminous arrow that targets one creature within 60 feet of yourself. On a hit, the attack deals Radiant damage equal to 1d8 + your Wisdom modifier.
Chalice. A constellation of a life-giving goblet appears on you. Whenever you cast a spell using a spell slot that restores Hit Points to a creature, you or another creature within 30 feet of you can regain Hit Points equal to 1d8 + your Wisdom modifier.
Dragon. A constellation of a wise dragon appears on you. When you make an Intelligence or a Wisdom check or a Constitution saving throw to maintain Concentration on a spell, you can treat a roll of 9 or lower on the d20 as a 10.
6TH LEVEL: COSMIC OMEN
Whenever you finish a long rest, you can consult your Star Map for omens. When you do so, roll a die. Until you finish your next Long Rest, you gain access to a special Reaction based on whether you rolled an even or an odd number on the die:

Weal (Even). Whenever a creature you can see within 30 feet of you is about to make a D20 Test, you can take a Reaction to roll 1d6 and add the number rolled to the total.
Woe (Odd). Whenever a creature you can see within 30 feet of you is about to make a D20 Test, you can take a Reaction to roll 1d6 and subtract the number rolled from the total.
You can use this Reaction a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

10TH LEVEL: TWINKLING CONSTELLATIONS
The constellations of your Starry Form improve. The 1d8 of the Archer and the Chalice becomes 2d8, and while the Dragon is active, you have Fly Speed of 20 feet and can hover. Moreover, at the start of each of your turns while in your Starry Form, you can change which constellation glimmers on your body.

14TH LEVEL: FULL OF STARS
While in your Starry Form, you become partially incorporeal, giving you Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage.
---------------------------
Circle of Dreams
Druids who are members of the Circle of Dreams hail from regions that have strong ties to the Feywild and its dreamlike realms. The druids’ guardianship of the natural world makes for a natural alliance between them and good-aligned fey. These druids seek to fill the world with dreamy wonder. Their magic mends wounds and brings joy to downcast hearts, and the realms they protect are gleaming, fruitful places, where dream and reality blur together and where the weary can find rest.

3RD LEVEL: BALM OF THE SUMMER COURT
You become imbued with the blessings of the Summer Court. You are a font of energy that offers respite from injuries. You have a pool of fey energy represented by a number of d6s equal to your druid level. As a bonus action, you can choose an ally you can see within 120 feet of you and spend a number of those dice equal to half your druid level or less. Roll the spent dice and add them together. The target regains a number of hit points equal to the total. The target also gains 1 temporary hit point per die spent. You regain the expended dice when you finish a long rest.

6TH LEVEL: HEARTH OF MOONLIGHT AND SHADOW
Home can be wherever you are. During a short or long rest, you can invoke the shadowy power of the Gloaming Court to help guard your respite. At the start of the rest, you touch a point in space, and an invisible, 30-foot-radius sphere of magic appears, centered on that point. Total cover blocks the sphere. While within the sphere, you and your allies gain a +5 bonus to Dexterity (Stealth) and Wisdom (Perception) checks, and any light from open flames in the sphere (a campfire, torches, or the like) isn't visible outside it. The sphere vanishes at the end of the rest or when you leave the sphere.

10th LEVEL: HIDDEN PATHS
You can use the hidden, magical pathways that some fey use to traverse space in a blink of an eye. As a bonus action on your turn, you can teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. Alternatively, you can use your action to teleport one willing creature you touch up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

14TH LEVEL: WALKER IN DREAMS
The magic of the Feywild grants you the ability to travel mentally or physically through dreamlands. When you finish a short rest, you can cast one of the following spells, without expending a spell slot or requiring material components: Dream (with you as the messenger), Scrying, or Teleportation Circle. This use of Teleportation Circle is special. Rather than opening a portal to a permanent teleportation circle, it opens a portal to the last location where you finished a long rest on your current plane of existence. If you haven't taken a long rest on your current plane, the spell fails but isn't wasted. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
Circle of the Shepherd
Druids of the Circle of the Shepherd commune with the spirits of nature, especially the spirits of beasts and the fey, and call to those spirits for aid. These druids recognize that all living things play a role in the natural world, yet they focus on protecting animals and fey creatures that have difficulty defending themselves. Shepherds, as they are known, see such creatures as their charges. They ward off monsters that threaten them, rebuke hunters who kill more prey than necessary, and prevent civilization from encroaching on rare animal habitats and on sites sacred to the fey. Many of these druids are happiest far from cities and towns, content to spend their days in the company of animals and the fey creatures of the wilds. Members of this circle become adventurers to oppose forces that threaten their charges or to seek knowledge and power that will help them safeguard their charges better. Wherever these druids go, the spirits of the wilderness are with them.

3RD LEVEL: SPEECH OF THE WOODS
You gain the ability to converse with beasts and many fey. You learn to speak, read, and write Sylvan. In addition, beasts can understand your speech, and you gain the ability to decipher their noises and motions. Most beasts lack the intelligence to convey or understand sophisticated concepts, but a friendly beast could relay what it has seen or heard in the recent past. This ability doesn’t grant you any special friendship with beasts, though you can combine this ability with gifts to curry favor with them as you would with any nonplayer character.

3RD LEVEL: SPIRIT TOTEM
You gain the ability to call forth nature spirits and use them to influence the world around you. As a bonus action, you can magically summon an incorporeal spirit to a point you can see within 60 feet of you. The spirit creates an aura in a 30-foot radius around that point. It counts as neither a creature nor an object, though it has the spectral appearance of the creature it represents. As a bonus action, you can move the spirit up to 60 feet to a point you can see. The spirit persists for 1 minute. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a short or long rest. The effect of the spirit’s aura depends on the type of spirit you summon from the options below.

Bear Spirit. The bear spirit grants you and your allies its might and endurance. Each creature of your choice in the aura when the spirit appears gains temporary hit points equal to 5 + your druid level. In addition, you and your allies gain advantage on Strength checks and Strength saving throws while in the aura.
Hawk Spirit. The hawk spirit is a consummate hunter, aiding you and your allies with its keen sight. When a creature makes an attack roll against a target in the spirit’s aura, you can use your reaction to grant advantage to that attack roll. In addition, you and your allies have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks while in the aura.
Unicorn Spirit. The unicorn spirit lends its protection to those nearby. You and your allies gain advantage on all ability checks made to detect creatures in the spirit’s aura. In addition, if you cast a spell using a spell slot that restores hit points to any creature inside or outside the aura, each creature of your choice in the aura also regains hit points equal to your druid level.
6TH LEVEL: MIGHTY SUMMONER
Beasts and fey that you conjure are more resilient than normal. Any beast or fey summoned or created by a spell that you cast gains two benefits:

The creature appears with more hit points than normal: 2 extra hit points per Hit Die it has.
The damage from its natural weapons is considered magical for the purpose of overcoming immunity and resistance to non-magical attacks and damage.
10TH LEVEL: GUARDIAN SPIRIT
Your Spirit Totem safeguards the beasts and fey that you call forth with your magic. When a beast or fey that you summoned or created with a spell ends its turn in your Spirit Totem aura, that creature regains a number of hit points equal to half your druid level.

14TH LEVEL: FAITHFUL SUMMONS
The nature spirits you commune with protect you when you are the most defenseless. If you are reduced to 0 hit points or are incapacitated against your will, you can immediately gain the benefits of Conjure Animals as if it were cast with a 9th-level spell slot. It summons four beasts of your choice that are challenge rating 2 or lower. The conjured beasts appear within 20 feet of you. If they receive no commands from you, they protect you from harm and attack your foes. The spell lasts for 1 hour, requiring no concentration, or until you dismiss it (no action required). Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
Circle of Spores
Druids of the Circle of Spores find beauty in decay. They see within mold and other fungi the ability to transform lifeless material into abundant, albeit somewhat strange, life. These druids believe that life and death are parts of a grand cycle, with one leading to the other and then back again. Death isn't the end of life, but instead a change of state that sees life shift into a new form. Druids of this circle have a complex relationship with the undead. They see nothing inherently wrong with undeath, which they consider to be a companion to life and death. But these druids believe that the natural cycle is healthiest when each segment of it is vibrant and changing. Undead that seek to replace all life with undeath, or that try to avoid passing to a final rest, violate the cycle and must be thwarted.

3RD LEVEL: CIRCLE SPELLS
Your symbiotic link to fungi and your ability to tap into the cycle of life and death grants you access to certain spells. You learn the Chill Touch cantrip, You also gain access to the spells listed for certain levels in the Circle of Spores Spells table. Once you gain access to one of these spells, you always have it prepared, and it doesn't count against the number of spells you can prepare each day. If you gain access to a spell that doesn't appear on the druid spell list, the spell is nonetheless a druid spell for you.

Circle of Spores Spells
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3rd	Chill Touch, Blindness/Deafness, Gentle Repose
5th	Animate Dead, Gaseous Form
7th	Blight, Confusion
9th	Cloudkill, Contagion
3RD LEVEL: HALO OF SPORES
You are surrounded by invisible, necrotic spores that are harmless until you unleash them on a creature nearby. When a creature you can see moves into a space within 10 feet of you or starts its turn there, you can use your reaction to deal 1d4 necrotic damage to that creature unless it succeeds on a Constitution saving throw against your spell save DC. The necrotic damage increases to 1d6 at 6th level, 1d8 at 10th level, and 1d10 at 14th level.

3RD LEVEL: SYMBIOTIC ENTITY
You gain the ability to channel magic into your spores. As an action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape feature to awaken those spores, rather than transforming into a beast form, and you gain 4 temporary hit points for each level you have in this class. While this feature is active, you gain the following benefits:

When you deal your Halo of Spores damage, roll the damage die a second time and add it to the total.
Your melee weapon attacks deal an extra 1d6 necrotic damage to any target they hit.
These benefits last for 10 minutes, until you lose all these temporary hit points. or until you use your Wild Shape again.
6TH LEVEL: FUNGAL INFESTATION
Your spores gain the ability to infest a corpse and animate it. If a beast or a humanoid that is Small or Medium dies within 10 feet of you, you can use your reaction to animate it, causing it to stand up immediately with 1 hit point. The creature uses the Zombie stat block in the Monster Manual. It remains animated for 1 hour, after which time it collapses and dies. In combat, the zombie's turn comes immediately after yours. It obeys your mental commands, and the only action it can take is the Attack action, making one melee attack. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

10TH LEVEL: SPREADING SPORES
You gain the ability to seed an area with deadly spores. As a bonus action while your Symbiotic Entity feature is active, you can hurl spores up to 30 feet away, where they swirl in a 10-foot cube for 1 minute. The spores disappear early if you use this feature again, if you dismiss them as a bonus action, or if your Symbiotic Entity feature is no longer active. Whenever a creature moves into the cube or starts its turn there, that creature takes your Halo of Spores damage, unless the creature succeeds on a Constitution saving throw against your spell save DC. A creature can take this damage no more than once per turn. While the cube of spores persists, you can't use your Halo of Spores reaction.

14TH LEVEL: FUNGAL BODY
The fungal spores in your body alter you: you can't be blinded, deafened, frightened, or poisoned, and any critical hit against you counts as a normal hit instead, unless you're incapacitated.
---------------------------
Circle of Wildfire
Druids within the Circle of Wildfire understand that destruction is sometimes the precursor of creation, such as when a forest fire promotes later growth. These druids bond with a primal spirit that harbors both destructive and creative power, allowing the druids to create controlled flames that burn away one thing but give life to another.

3RD LEVEL: CIRCLE SPELLS
You have formed a bond with a wildfire spirit, a primal being of creation and destruction. Your link with this spirit grants you access to some spells when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown on the Circle of Wildfire Spells table. Once you gain access to one of these spells, you always have it prepared, and it doesn't count against the number of spells you can prepare each day. If you gain access to a spell that doesn't appear on the Druid Spell List, the spell is nonetheless a druid spell for you.

Circle of Wildfire spells
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3rd	Burning Hands, Cure Wounds, Flaming Sphere, Scorching Ray
5th	Plant Growth, Revivify
7th	Aura of Life, Fire Shield
9th	Flame Strike, Mass Cure Wounds
3RD LEVEL: SUMMON WILDFIRE SPIRIT
You can summon the primal spirit bound to your soul. As an action, you can expend one use of your Wild Shape feature to summon your wildfire spirit, rather than assuming a beast form. The spirit appears in an unoccupied space of your choice that you can see within 30 feet of you. Each creature within 10 feet of the spirit (other than you) when it appears must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw against your spell save DC or take 2d6 fire damage. The spirit is friendly to you and your companions and obeys your commands. See this creature's game statistics in the Wildfire Spirit stat block, which uses your proficiency bonus (PB) in several places. You determine the spirit's appearance. Some spirits take the form of a humanoid figure made of gnarled branches covered in flame, while others look like beasts wreathed in fire. In combat, the spirit shares your initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. The only action it takes on its turn is the Dodge action, unless you take a bonus action on your turn to command it to take another action. That action can be one in its stat block or some other action. If you are incapacitated, the spirit can take any action of its choice, not just Dodge. The spirit manifests for 1 hour, until it is reduced to 0 hit points, until you use this feature to summon the spirit again, or until you die.

6TH LEVEL: ENHANCED BOND
The bond with your wildfire spirit enhances your destructive and restorative spells. Whenever you cast a spell that deals fire damage or restores hit points while your wildfire spirit is summoned, roll a d8, and you gain a bonus equal to the number rolled to one damage or healing roll of the spell. In addition, when you cast a spell with a range other than self, the spell can originate from you or your wildfire spirit.

10TH LEVEL: CAUTERIZING FLAMES
You gain the ability to turn death into magical flames that can heal or incinerate. When a Small or larger creature dies within 30 feet of you or your wildfire spirit, a harmless spectral flame springs forth in the dead creature's space and flickers there for 1 minute. When a creature you can see enters that space, you can use your reaction to extinguish the spectral flame there and either heal the creature or deal fire damage to it. The healing or damage equals 2d10 + your Wisdom modifier. You can use this reaction a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

14TH LEVEL: BLAZING REVIVAL
The bond with your wildfire spirit can save you from death. If the spirit is within 120 feet of you when you are reduced to 0 hit points and thereby fall unconscious, you can cause the spirit to drop to 0 hit points. You then regain half your hit points and immediately rise to your feet. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a long rest.
=========================
FIGHTER
Primary Ability: Strength or Dexterity
The dungeon delving, monster slaying, and other dangerous work common among adventurers is second nature for a Fighter. There are great risks but also great rewards: gold, magic weaponry, and glory.

CREATING A FIGHTER
To create a Fighter, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a level 1 character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Fighter” sidebar.

Then look at the Fighter table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. Descriptions of those features appear in the “Fighter Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d10 per Fighter level

Hit Points at Level 1: 10 + your Constitution modifier

Hit Points per Later Level: 1d10 (or 6) + your Constitution modifier

PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
Skills (Choose 2): Acrobatics, Animal Handling, Athletics, History, Insight, Intimidation, Persuasion, Perception, Survival
Weapons: Simple Weapons, Martial Weapons
Tools: None
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor, Medium Armor, Heavy Armor, Shields

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a level 1 character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 155 GP on equipment of your choice.

(a) Chain Mail, Greatsword, Flail, 8 Javelins, 4 GP
(b) Studded Leather Armor, Scimitar, Shortsword, Longbow, 20 Arrows, Quiver, 11 GP
Dungeoneer’s Pack
MULTICLASSING AND THE FIGHTER
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Fighter as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in one of the Fighter’s primary abilities, Strength or Dexterity, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you’re already a Fighter.
Proficiencies Gained. If Fighter isn’t your initial class, you gain proficiency with Martial Weapons when you take your first Fighter level.
Armor Training. When you gain your first Fighter level, you gain armor training with the following: Light Armor, Medium Armor, and Shields.
FIGHTER CLASS FEATURES
As a Fighter, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Fighter table.



LEVEL 1: FIGHTING STYLE
You have honed your martial prowess and gain a Fighting Style feat of your choice. Whenever you gain a Fighter level, you can replace the feat you chose with a different Fighting Style feat.

LEVEL 1: SECOND WIND
You have a limited well of physical and mental stamina that you can draw on. As a Bonus Action, you can use it to regain Hit Points equal to 1d10 + your Fighter level. You can use this feature twice. You regain one expended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. When you reach certain Fighter levels, you gain more uses of this feature, as shown in the Second Wind column of the Fighter table.

LEVEL 1: WEAPON MASTERY
Your training with weapons allows you to use the Mastery property of three kinds of Simple or Martial weapons of your choice. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can practice weapon drills and change one of those weapon choices. When you reach certain Fighter levels, you gain the ability to use the Mastery properties of more kinds of weapons, as shown in the Weapon Mastery column of the Fighter table.

LEVEL 2: ACTION SURGE
You can push yourself beyond your normal limits for a moment. On your turn, you can take one additional action, except the Magic action. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest. Starting at level 17, you can use it twice before a Rest but only once on a turn.

LEVEL 2: TACTICAL MIND
You have a mind for tactics on and off the battlefield. When you fail an ability check, you can expend a use of your Second Wind to push yourself toward success. Rather than regaining Hit Points, you roll 1d10 and add the number rolled to the ability check, potentially turning it into a success. If the check still fails, this use of Second Wind isn’t expended.

LEVEL 3: FIGHTER SUBCLASS
You gain a Fighter subclass of your choice:

Battle Master
Champion
Eldritch Knight
Psi Warrior
Arcane Archer (Non-Playtest)
Brawler (depreciated. No longer playtest)
Cavalier (Non-Playtest)
Rune Knight (Non-Playtest)
Samurai (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special features at certain Fighter levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Fighter level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Fighter table, you gain this feature again at levels 6, 8, 12, 14, 16.

LEVEL 5: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

LEVEL 5: TACTICAL SHIFT
Whenever you activate your Second Wind with a Bonus Action, you can move up to half your Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks.

LEVEL 9: INDOMITABLE
If you fail a saving throw, you can reroll it with a bonus equal to your Fighter level. You must use the new roll, and you can’t use this feature again until you finish a Long Rest. You can use this feature twice between Long Rests starting at level 13 and three times between Long Rests starting at level 17.

LEVEL 9: TACTICAL MASTER
When you attack with a weapon whose Mastery property you can use, you can replace that property with the Push, Sap or Slow property for that attack.

LEVEL 11: TWO EXTRA ATTACKS
You can attack three times instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

LEVEL 13: STUDIED ATTACKS
You study your opponents and learn from each attack you make. If you make an attack roll against a creature and miss, you have Advantage on your next attack roll against that creature before the end of your next turn.

LEVEL 19: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Combat Prowess is recommended.

LEVEL 20: THREE EXTRA ATTACKS
You can attack four times instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.
---------------------------
BATTLE MASTER
Battle Masters are students of the art of battle, learning martial techniques passed down through generations. The most accomplished Battle Masters are well-rounded figures who combine their carefully honed combat skills with academic study in the fields of history, theory, and the arts.

LEVEL 3: COMBAT SUPERIORITY
Your experience on the battlefield has honed your fighting techniques. You learn Maneuvers that are fueled by special dice called Superiority Dice.

Maneuvers. You learn three different Maneuvers of your choice from the Maneuvers Options. Many Maneuvers enhance an attack in some way. You can use only one Maneuver per attack. You learn two additional Maneuvers of your choice when you reach Fighter level 7, 10, and 15. Each time you learn new Maneuvers, you can also replace one Maneuver you know with a different one.
Superiority Dice. You have four Superiority Dice, which are d8s. A Superiority Die is expended when you use it. You regain all expended Superiority Dice when you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest. You gain an additional Superiority Die when you reach Fighter level 7 (five dice total) and 15 (six dice total).
Saving Throws. If a Maneuver requires a Saving Throw, the DC equals 8 + your Proficiency Bonus + your Strength or Dexterity modifier (your choice).
LEVEL 3: STUDENT OF WAR
You gain proficiency with one type of Artisan’s Tools of your choice, and you gain proficiency in one skill of your choice from the skills available to Fighters at level 1.

LEVEL 7: KNOW YOUR ENEMY
As a Bonus Action, you can discern certain strengths and weaknesses of a creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself; you know whether that creature has any damage Immunities, Resistances, or Vulnerabilities, and if the creature has any, you know what they are. Once you use this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore a use of the feature by expending one Superiority Die (no action required).

LEVEL 10: IMPROVED COMBAT SUPERIORITY
Your Superiority Die becomes a d10.

LEVEL 15: RELENTLESS
Once per turn, when you use a Maneuver, you can roll 1d8 and use the number rolled instead of expending a Superiority Die.

LEVEL 18: ULTIMATE COMBAT SUPERIORITY
Your Superiority Die becomes a d12.
---------------------------
CHAMPION
A Champion focuses on the development of martial prowess in a relentless pursuit of victory. Champions combine rigorous training with physical excellence to deal devastating blows, withstand peril, and garner glory. Whether in athletic contests or bloody battle, Champions strive for the crown of the victor.

LEVEL 3: IMPROVED CRITICAL
Your attack rolls with weapons and Unarmed Strikes can score a Critical Hit on a roll of 19 or 20.

LEVEL 3: REMARKABLE ATHLETE
Thanks to your athleticism, you have Advantage on Initiative rolls and Strength (Athletics) checks. In addition, immediately after you roll a Critical Hit, you can move up to half your Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks.

LEVEL 7: ADDITIONAL FIGHTING STYLE
You gain another Fighting Style feat of your choice.

LEVEL 10: HEROIC WARRIOR
The thrill of battle drives you toward victory. During combat, you can give yourself Heroic Inspiration whenever you start your turn without it.

LEVEL 15: SUPERIOR CRITICAL
Your attack rolls with weapons and Unarmed Strikes can now score a critical hit on a roll of 18–20.

LEVEL 18: SURVIVOR
You attain the pinnacle of resilience in battle, giving you these benefits:

Defy Death. You have Advantage on death saving throws. Moreover, when you roll 18–20 on a death save, you gain the benefit of rolling a 20 on it.
Heroic Rally. At the start of each of your turns, you regain Hit Points equal to 5 + your Constitution modifier if you are Bloodied and you have at least 1 Hit Point.
---------------------------
ELDRITCH KNIGHT
Eldritch Knights combine the martial mastery common to all Fighters with a careful study of magic. Their spells both complement and extend their combat skills, providing additional protection to shore up their armor and also allowing them to engage many foes at once with explosive magic.

LEVEL 3: SPELLCASTING
You have learned to cast spells. See the Player’s Handbook for rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as an Eldritch Knight.

Cantrips. You know two cantrips of your choice from the Wizard spell list. Whenever you gain a Fighter level, you can replace one of this feature’s cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Wizard spell list. When you reach level 10 in this class, you learn another Wizard cantrip of your choice.
Spell Slots. The Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your spells of level 1 and higher. To cast one of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest.
Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare a list of spells of level 1 and higher that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose three level 1 spells from the Wizard spell list. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Fighter levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Wizard spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a level 7 Fighter, your list of prepared spells can include five Wizard spells of levels 1 and 2, in any combination.
Changing your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a level in this class, you can replace one of the spells you know with another spell of your choice from the Wizard spell list. The new spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots.
Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for your Eldritch Knight spells.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you prepare for this subclass.
Eldritch knight spell slot table

LEVEL 3: WAR BOND
You learn a ritual that creates a magical bond between yourself and one weapon. You perform the ritual over the course of 1 hour, which can be done during a Short Rest. The weapon must be within your reach throughout the ritual, at the conclusion of which you touch the weapon and forge the bond. The bond fails if another Fighter is bonded to the weapon or if the weapon is a magic item to which someone else is attuned.

Once you have bonded a weapon to yourself, you can’t be disarmed of that weapon unless you have the Incapacitated condition. If it is on the same plane of existence, you can summon that weapon as a Bonus Action, causing it to teleport instantly to your hand. You can have up to two bonded weapons, but can summon only one at a time with your Bonus Action. If you attempt to bond with a third weapon, you must break the bond with one of the other two.

LEVEL 7: WAR MAGIC
When you take the Attack action on your turn, you can replace one of the attacks with a casting of one of your Wizard cantrips that has a casting time of an action.

LEVEL 10: ELDRITCH STRIKE
You learn how to make your weapon strikes undercut a creature’s ability to withstand your spells. When you hit a creature with an attack using a weapon, that creature has Disadvantage on the next saving throw it makes against a spell you cast before the end of your next turn.

LEVEL 15: ARCANE CHARGE
When you use your Action Surge, you can teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. You can teleport before or after the additional action.

LEVEL 18: IMPROVED WAR MAGIC
When you take the Attack action on your turn, you can replace two of the attacks with a casting of one of your level 1 or level 2 Wizard spells that has a casting time of an action.
---------------------------
PSI WARRIOR
Awake to the psionic power within, a Psi Warrior is a fighter who augments their physical might with psi-infused weapon strikes, telekinetic lashes, and barriers of mental force. Many githyanki train to become such warriors, as do some of the most disciplined high elves. In the world of Eberron, many young kalashtar dream of becoming Psi Warriors. As a Psi Warrior, you might have honed your psionic abilities through solo discipline, unlocked it under the tutelage of a master, or refined it at an academy dedicated to wielding the mind's power as both weapon and shield.

Level 3: Psionic Power
You harbor a wellspring of psionic energy within yourself. It is represented by your Psionic Energy Dice, which fuel powers you have from this subclass. The Psi Warrior Energy Dice table shows the die size and number of these dice you have when you reach certain Fighter levels.

Psi Warrior Energy Dice
Fighter Level	Die Size	Number
3	D6	4
5	D8	6
9	D8	8
11	D10	8
13	D10	10
17	D12	12
Any features in this subclass that use a Psionic Energy Die use only the dice from this subclass. Some of your powers expend the Psionic Energy die they use, as specified in a power's description, and you can't use a power if it requires you to use a die when your Psionic Energy Dice are expended. You regain one of your expended Psionic Energy dice when you finish a Short Rest and you regain all of them when you finish a Long Rest.

The powers below use your Psionic Energy dice.

Protective Field. When you or another creature you can see within 30 feet of you takes damage, you can use your Reaction to expend one Psionic Energy die, roll the die, and reduce the damage taken by the number rolled plus your Intelligence modifier (minimum reduction of 1), as you create a momentary shield of telekinetic force.
Psionic Strike. You can propel your weapons with psionic force. Once on each of your turns, immediately after you hit a target within 30 feet of you with an attack and deal damage to it with a weapon, you can expend one Psionic Energy die, rolling it and dealing force damage to the target equal to the number rolled + your Intelligence modifier.
Telekinetic Movement. You can move an object or a creature with your mind. As an action, you target one loose object that is Large or smaller or one willing creature, other than yourself. If you can see the target and it is within 30 feet of you, you can move it up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. Alternatively, if it is a Tiny object, you can move it to or from your hand. Either way, you can move the target horizontally, vertically, or both. Once you take this action, you can't do so again until you finish a Short or Long Rest, unless you expend a Psionic Energy die to take it again.
Level 7: Telekinetic Adept
You have mastered new ways to use your telekinetic abilities, detailed below.

Psi-Powered Leap. As a Bonus Action, you can propel your body with your mind. You gain a flying speed equal to twice your walking speed until the end of the current turn. Once you take this bonus action, you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest, unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it.
Telekinetic Thrust. When you deal damage to a target with your Psionic Strike, you can force the target to make a Strength saving throw against a DC equal to 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Intelligence modifier. If the save fails, you can knock the target prone or move it up to 10 feet in any direction horizontally.
Level 10: Guarded Mind
You have Resistance to Psychic damage. Moreover, if you start your turn with the Charmed or Frightened condition, you can expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) and end every effect on yourself giving you those conditions.

Level 15: Bulwark of Force
You can shield yourself and others with telekinetic force. As a Bonus Action, you can choose creatures, which can include you, that you can see within 30 feet of yourself, up to a number of creatures equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of one creature). Each of the chosen creatures is protected by Half Cover for 1 minute or until you have the Incapacitated condition. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest, unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it.

Level 18: Telekinetic Master
You always have the Telekinesis spell prepared. With this feature you can cast it without a spell slot or components, and your spellcasting ability for the spell is Intelligence. On each of your turns when you maintain Concentration on it, including the turn when you cast it, you can make one attack with a weapon as a Bonus Action. Once you cast the spell with this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest, unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it.
---------------------------
Arcane Archer
An Arcane Archer studies a unique elven method of archery that weaves magic into attacks to produce supernatural effects. Arcane Archers are some of their most elite warriors among the elves. They stand watch over the fringes of elven domains, keeping a keen eye out for trespassers and using magic-infused arrows to defeat monsters and invaders before they can reach elven settlements. Over the centuries, the methods of these elf archers have been learned by members of other races who can also balance arcane aptitude with archery.

LEVEL 3: ARCANE ARCHER LORE
You learn magical theory or some of the secrets of nature – typical for practitioners of this elven martial tradition. You choose to gain proficiency in either the Arcana or the Nature skill, and you choose to learn either the Prestidigitation or Druidcraft cantrip.

LEVEL 3: ARCANE SHOT
You learn to unleash special magical effects with some of your shots. When you gain this feature, you learn two Arcane Shot options of your choice (see "Arcane Shot Options" below). Once per turn when you fire an arrow from a shortbow or longbow as part of the Attack action, you can apply one of your Arcane Shot options to that arrow. You decide to use the option when the arrow hits, unless the option doesn’t involve an attack roll. You have two uses of this ability, and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a short or long rest. You gain an additional Arcane Shot option of your choice when you reach certain levels in this class: 7th, 10th, 15th, and 18th level. Each option also improves when you become an 18th-level fighter.

LEVEL 7: MAGIC ARROW
You gain the ability to infuse arrows with magic. Whenever you fire a nonmagical arrow from a shortbow or longbow, you can make it magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and immunity to nonmagical attacks and damage. The magic fades from the arrow immediately after it hits or misses its target.

LEVEL 7: CURVING ARROW
You learn how to direct an errant arrow toward a new target. When you make an attack roll with a magic arrow and miss, you can use a bonus action to reroll the attack roll against a different target within 60 feet of the original target.

LEVEL 15: EVER-READY SHOT
Your magical archery is available whenever battle starts. If you roll initiative and have no uses of Arcane Shot remaining, you regain one use of it.

Arcane Shot Options
The Arcane Shot feature lets you choose options for it at certain levels. The options are presented here in alphabetical order. They are all magical effects, and each one is associated with one of the schools of magic. If an option requires a saving throw, your Arcane Shot save DC equals 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Intelligence modifier.

Banishing Arrow. You use abjuration magic to try to temporarily banish your target to a harmless location in the Feywild. The creature hit by the arrow must also succeed on a Charisma saving throw or be banished. While banished in this way, its speed is 0, and it is incapacitated. At the end of its next turn, the target reappears in the space it vacated or in the nearest unoccupied space if that space is occupied.
After you reach 18th level in this class, a target also takes 2d6 force damage when the arrow hits it.
Beguiling Arrow. Your enchantment magic causes this arrow to temporarily beguile its target. The creature hit by the arrow takes an extra 2d6 psychic damage, and choose one of your allies within 30 feet of the target. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw, or it is charmed by the chosen ally until the start of your next turn. This effect ends early if the chosen ally attacks the charmed target, deals damage to it, or forces it to make a saving throw.
The psychic damage increases to 4d6 when you reach 18th level in this class.
Bursting Arrow. You imbue your arrow with force energy drawn from the school of evocation. The arrow detonates after your attack. Immediately after the arrow hits the creature, the target and all other creatures within 10 feet of it take 2d6 force damage each.
The force damage increases to 4d6 when you reach 18th level in this class.
Enfeebling Arrow. You weave necromantic magic into your arrow. The creature hit by the arrow takes an extra 2d6 necrotic damage. The target must also succeed on a Constitution saving throw, or the damage dealt by its weapon attacks is halved until the start of your next turn.
The necrotic damage increases to 4d6 when you reach 18th level in this class.
Grasping Arrow. When this arrow strikes its target, conjuration magic creates grasping, poisonous brambles, which wrap around the target. The creature hit by the arrow takes an extra 2d6 poison damage, its speed is reduced by 10 feet, and it takes 2d6 slashing damage the first time on each turn it moves 1 foot or more without teleporting. The target or any creature that can reach it can use its action to remove the brambles with a successful Strength (Athletics) check against your Arcane Shot save DC. Otherwise, the brambles last for 1 minute or until you use this option again.
The poison damage and slashing damage both increase to 4d6 when you reach 18th level in this class.
Piercing Arrow. You use transmutation magic to give your arrow an ethereal quality. When you use this option, you don’t make an attack roll for the attack. Instead, the arrow fires forward in a line, which is 1 foot wide and 30 feet long, before disappearing. The arrow passes harmlessly through objects, ignoring cover. Each creature in that line must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes damage as if it were hit by the arrow, plus an extra 1d6 piercing damage. On a successful save, a target takes half as much damage.
The piercing damage increases to 2d6 when you reach 18th level in this class.
Seeking Arrow. Using divination magic, you grant your arrow the ability to seek out your target, allowing the arrow to curve and twist its path in search of its prey. When you use this option, you don’t make an attack roll for the attack. Instead, choose one creature you have seen in the past minute. The arrow flies toward that creature, moving around corners if necessary and ignoring three-quarters cover and half cover. If the target is within the weapon’s range and there is a path large enough for the arrow to travel to the target, the target must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, it takes damage as if it were hit by the arrow, plus an extra 1d6 force damage, and you learn the target’s current location. On a successful save, the target takes half as much damage, and you don’t learn its location.
The force damage increases to 2d6 when you reach 18th level in this class.
Shadow Arrow. You weave illusion magic into your arrow, causing it to occlude your foe’s vision with shadows. The creature hit by the arrow takes an extra 2d6 psychic damage, and it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be unable to see anything farther than 5 feet away until the start of your next turn.
The psychic damage increases to 4d6 when you reach 18th level in this class.
---------------------------
BRAWLER
Brawlers focus their training and study not on swordplay and battle tactics, but on the skills needed to turn a punch or kick into a brutal strike and any innocuous object into a deadly weapon. Some Brawlers thrive in tavern scuffles and street rumbles, while others excel in espionage, wielding ordinary objects with the deadliness of an assassin’s knife.

LEVEL 3: UNARMED EXPERT
You can roll 1d6 plus your Strength modifier in place of the normal damage of your Unarmed Strike. If you aren’t holding any weapons or a Shield when you make the attack roll, the d6 becomes a d8.

LEVEL 3: IMPROVISED EXPERT
You are proficient with Improvised Weapons. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, choose one weapon property from the One-Handed list and one from the Two-Handed list:

One-Handed: Light or Thrown (Range 20/60)
Two-Handed: Reach or Thrown (Range 10/30)
Until the end of your next Long Rest, the One- Handed choice applies to the one-handed Improvised Weapons you wield, and the Two- Handed choice applies to the two-handed ones. In addition, whenever you attack with an Improvised Weapon, you can give it one of the following Mastery properties for that attack, depending on whether it can be wielded in one hand or two:

One-Handed: Sap, Slow, or Vex
Two-Handed: Cleave, Push, or Topple
LEVEL 7: GRAPPLING EXPERT
You can make one Unarmed Strike as a Bonus Action. When you use Unarmed Strike in this way, you must choose the Grapple or Shove option. In addition, at the start of each of your turns, you can deal 1d6 Bludgeoning damage to one creature Grappled by you.

LEVEL 10: DIRTY FIGHTING
You have Advantage on attack rolls made with Improvised Weapons and Unarmed Strikes against a creature Grappled by you.

LEVEL 15: IMPROVISED SPECIALIST
You are a master at making the ordinary deadly. Whenever you hit a creature with an Improvised Weapon, you can add your Proficiency Bonus to the damage roll, and the damage die of your two-handed Improvised Weapons becomes 1d12. In addition, whenever you attack with an Improvised Weapon, you can use two Mastery properties from Improvised Expert, instead of one.

LEVEL 18: UNARMED SPECIALIST
Your Unarmed Strikes improve to a d8. If you aren’t holding any weapons or a Shield when you make the attack roll, the d8 becomes a d10.
---------------------------
Cavalier
The archetypal cavalier excels at mounted combat. Usually born among the nobility and raised at court, a cavalier is equally at home leading a cavalry charge or exchanging repartee at a state dinner. Cavaliers also learn how to guard those in their charge from harm, often serving as the protectors of their superiors and of the weak. Compelled to right wrongs or earn prestige, many of these fighters leave their lives of comfort to embark on glorious adventure.

LEVEL 3: BONUS PROFICIENCY
You gain proficiency in one of the following skills of your choice: Animal Handling, History, Insight, Performance, or Persuasion. Alternatively, you learn one language of your choice.

LEVEL 3: BORN TO THE SADDLE
Your mastery as a rider becomes apparent. You have advantage on saving throws made to avoid falling off your mount. If you fall off your mount and descend no more than 10 feet, you can land on your feet if you’re not incapacitated. Finally, mounting or dismounting a creature costs you only 5 feet of movement, rather than half your speed.

LEVEL 3: UNWAVERING MARK
You can menace your foes, foiling their attacks and punishing them for harming others. When you hit a creature with a melee weapon attack, you can mark the creature until the end of your next turn. This effect ends early if you are incapacitated or you die, or if someone else marks the creature. While it is within 5 feet of you, a creature marked by you has disadvantage on any attack roll that doesn't target you. In addition, if a creature marked by you deals damage to anyone other than you, you can make a special melee weapon attack against the marked creature as a bonus action on your next turn. You have advantage on the attack roll, and if it hits, the attack's weapon deals extra damage to the target equal to half your fighter level. Regardless of the number of creatures you mark, you can make this special attack a number of times equal to your Strength modifier (a minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 7: WARDING MANEUVER
You learn to fend off strikes directed at you, your mount, or other creatures nearby. If you or a creature you can see within 5 feet of you is hit by an attack, you can roll 1d8 as a reaction if you're wielding a melee weapon or a shield. Roll the die, and add the number rolled to the target's AC against that attack. If the attack still hits, the target has resistance against the attack's damage. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Constitution modifier (a minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 10: HOLD THE LINE
You become a master of locking down your enemies. Creatures provoke an opportunity attack from you when they move 5 feet or more while within your reach, and if you hit a creature with an opportunity attack, the target's speed is reduced to 0 until the end of the current turn.

LEVEL 15: FEROCIOUS CHARGER
You can run down your foes, whether you're mounted or not. If you move at least 10 feet in a straight line right before attacking a creature and you hit it with the attack, that target must succeed on a Strength saving throw (DC 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Strength modifier) or be knocked prone. You can use this feature only once on each of your turns.

LEVEL 18: VIGILANT DEFENDER
You respond to danger with extraordinary vigilance. In combat, you get a special reaction that you can take once on every creature's turn, except your turn. You can use this special reaction only to make an opportunity attack, and you can't use it on the same turn that you take your normal reaction.
---------------------------
Rune Knight
Rune Knights enhance their martial prowess using the supernatural power of runes, an ancient practice that originated with giants. Rune cutters can be found among any family of giants, and you likely learned your methods first or second hand from such a mystical artisan. Whether you found the giant's work carved into a hill or cave, learned of the runes from a sage, or met the giant in person, you studied the giant's craft and learned how to apply magic runes to empower your equipment.

LEVEL 3: BONUS PROFICIENCIES
You gain proficiency with smith’s tools, and you learn to speak, read, and write Giant.

LEVEL 3: RUNE CARVER
You can use magic runes to enhance your gear. You learn two runes of your choice, from among the runes described below, and each time you gain a level in this class, you can replace one rune you know with a different one from this feature. When you reach certain levels in this class, you learn additional runes, as shown in the Runes Known table.

Runes Known
Fighter Level	Number of Runes
3rd	2
7th	3
10th	4
15th	5
Whenever you finish a long rest, you can touch a number of objects equal to the number of runes you know, and you inscribe a different rune onto each of the objects. To be eligible, an object must be a weapon, a suit of armor, a shield, a piece of jewelry, or something else you can wear or hold in a hand. Your rune remains on an object until you finish a long rest, and an object can bear only one of your runes at a time. The following runes are available to you when you learn a rune. If a rune has a level requirement, you must be at least that level in this class to learn the rune. If a rune requires a saving throw, your Rune Magic save DC equals 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Constitution modifier.

Cloud Rune. This rune emulates the deceptive magic used by some cloud giants. While wearing or carrying an object inscribed with this rune, you have advantage on Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) checks and Charisma (Deception) checks. In addition, when you or a creature you can see within 30 feet of you is hit by an attack roll, you can use your reaction to invoke the rune and choose a different creature within 30 feet of you, other than the attacker. The chosen creature becomes the target of the attack, using the same roll. This magic can transfer the attack's effects regardless of the attack's range. Once you invoke this rune, you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest.
Fire Rune. This rune's magic channels the masterful craftsmanship of great smiths. While wearing or carrying an object inscribed with this rune, your proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check you make that uses your proficiency with a tool. In addition, when you hit a creature with an attack using a weapon, you can invoke the rune to summon fiery shackles: the target takes an extra 2d6 fire damage, and it must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be restrained for 1 minute. While restrained by the shackles, the target takes 2d6 fire damage at the start of each of its turns. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, banishing the shackles on a success. Once you invoke this rune, you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest.
Frost Rune. This rune's magic evokes the might of those who survive in the wintry wilderness, such as frost giants. While wearing or carrying an object inscribed with this rune, you have advantage on Wisdom (Animal Handling) checks and Charisma (Intimidation) checks. In addition, you can invoke the rune as a bonus action to increase your sturdiness. For 10 minutes, you gain a +2 bonus to all ability checks and saving throws that use Strength or Constitution. Once you invoke this rune, you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest.
Stone Rune. This rune's magic channels the judiciousness associated with stone giants. While wearing or carrying an object inscribed with this rune, you have advantage on Wisdom (Insight) checks, and you have darkvision out to a range of 120 feet. In addition, when a creature you can see ends its turn within 30 feet of you, you can use your reaction to invoke the rune and force the creature to make a Wisdom saving throw. Unless the save succeeds, the creature is charmed by you for 1 minute. While charmed in this way, the creature has a speed of 0 and is incapacitated, descending into a dreamy stupor. The creature repeats the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on a success. Once you invoke this rune, you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest.
Hill Rune (7th Level or Higher). This rune's magic bestows a resilience reminiscent of a hill giant. While wearing or carrying an object that bears this rune, you have advantage on saving throws against being poisoned, and you have resistance against poison damage. In addition, you can invoke the rune as a bonus action, gaining resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage for 1 minute. Once you invoke this rune, you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest.
Storm Rune (7th Level or Higher). Using this rune, you can glimpse the future like a storm giant seer. While wearing or carrying an object inscribed with this rune, you have advantage on Intelligence (Arcana) checks, and you can't be surprised as long as you aren't incapacitated. In addition, you can invoke the rune as a bonus action to enter a prophetic state for 1 minute or until you're incapacitated. Until the state ends, when you or another creature you can see within 60 feet of you makes an attack roll, a saving throw, or an ability check, you can use your reaction to cause the roll to have advantage or disadvantage. Once you invoke this rune, you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest.
LEVEL 3: GIANT MIGHT
You have learned how to imbue yourself with the might of giants. As a bonus action, you magically gain the following benefits, which last for 1 minute:

If you are smaller than Large, you become Large, along with anything you are wearing. If you lack the room to become Large, your size doesn't change.
You have advantage on Strength checks and Strength saving throws.
Once on each of your turns, one of your attacks with a weapon or an unarmed strike can deal an extra 1d6 damage to a target on a hit.
You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 7: RUNIC SHIELD
You learn to invoke your rune magic to protect your allies. When another creature you can see within 60 feet of you is hit by an attack roll, you can use your reaction to force the attacker to reroll the d20 and use the new roll. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 10: GREAT STATURE
The magic of your runes permanently alters you. When you gain this feature, roll 3d4. You grow a number of inches in height equal to the roll. Moreover, the extra damage you deal with your Giant's Might feature increases to 1d8.

LEVEL 15: MASTER OF RUNES
You can invoke each rune you know from your Rune Carver feature twice, rather than once, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a short or long rest.

LEVEL 18: RUNIC JUGGERNAUT
You learn how to amplify your rune-powered transformation. As a result, the extra damage you deal with the Giant's Might feature increases to 1d10. Moreover, when you use that feature, your size can increase to Huge, and while you are that size, your reach increases by 5 feet.
---------------------------
Samurai
The Samurai is a fighter who draws on an implacable fighting spirit to overcome enemies. A samurai’s resolve is nearly unbreakable, and the enemies in a samurai’s path have two choices: yield or die fighting.

LEVEL 3: BONUS PROFICIENCY
You gain proficiency in one of the following skills of your choice: History, Insight, Performance, or Persuasion. Alternatively, you learn one language of your choice.

LEVEL 3: FIGHTING SPIRIT
Your intensity in battle can shield you and help you strike true. As a bonus action on your turn, you can give yourself advantage on all weapon attack rolls until the end of the current turn. When you do so, you also gain 5 temporary hit points. The number of hit points increases when you reach certain levels in this class, increasing to 10 at 10th level and 15 at 15th level. You can use this feature three times. You regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 7: ELEGANT COURTIER
Your discipline and attention to detail allow you to excel in social situations. Whenever you make a Charisma (Persuasion) check, you gain a bonus to the check equal to your Wisdom modifier. Your self-control also causes you to gain proficiency in Wisdom saving throws. If you already have this proficiency, you instead gain proficiency in Intelligence or Charisma saving throws (your choice).

LEVEL 10: TIRELESS SPIRIT
When you roll initiative and have no uses of Fighting Spirit remaining, you regain one use.

LEVEL 15: RAPID STRIKE
You learn to trade accuracy for swift strikes. If you take the Attack action on your turn and have advantage on an attack roll against one of the targets, you can forgo the advantage for that roll to make an additional weapon attack against that target, as part of the same action. You can't do so more than once per turn.

LEVEL 18: STRENGTH BEFORE DEATH
Your fighting spirit can delay the grasp of death. If you take damage that reduces you to 0 hit points, you can use your reaction to delay falling unconscious, and you can immediately take an extra turn. While you have 0 hit points during that extra turn, taking damage causes death saving throw failures as normal, and three death saving throw failures can still kill you. When the extra turn ends, you fall unconscious if you still have 0 hit points. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a long rest.
=========================
MONK
Primary Ability: Dexterity and Wisdom

Monks use rigorous combat training and mental discipline to align themselves with the multiverse and tap into internal reservoirs of power. Different Monks conceptualize this power in various ways: as breath, energy, life force, essence, or self, for example. Whether channeled as a striking display of martial prowess or as a subtler focus of defense and speed, this power infuses all that a Monk does.

Monks harness and focus their internal power to create extraordinary, even supernatural, effects. They channel uncanny speed and strength into their attacks, with or without the use of weapons. In their hands and guided by their power, even the most basic weapons can become sophisticated implements of combat mastery. And their mightiest attacks can stun their opponents.

Many Monks find that a structured life of ascetic withdrawal from the mundane world helps them cultivate the physical and mental discipline they need to harness their power. Other Monks believe that immersing themselves in the vibrant confusion of life helps to fuel their determination and discipline.

Monks generally view their adventures as personal tests of their physical and mental development. They are driven by a desire to accomplish a greater mission than merely slaying monsters and plundering treasure; they strive to hone themselves into living weapons.

CREATING A MONK
To create a Monk, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a 1st-level character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Monk” sidebar.

Then look at the Monk table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. The descriptions of those features appear in the “Monk Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d8 per Monk level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Level after 1st: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Skills (Choose 2): Acrobatics, Athletics, History, Insight, Religion, Stealth
Weapons: Simple Weapons, Martial Weapons that have the Light property
Tools: Choose one type of Artisan’s Tool or Musical Instrument
ARMOR TRAINING
None

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a 1st-level character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 50 GP on equipment of your choice.

Artisan’s Tools or Musical Instrument (chosen for the tool proficiency)
Dagger (x5)
Explorer's Pack
Spear
11 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE MONK
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Monk as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Monk’s primary abilities, Dexterity and Wisdom, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you are already a Monk.
MONK CLASS FEATURES
As a Monk, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Monk table.



1ST LEVEL: MARTIAL ARTS
Your practice of martial arts gives you mastery of combat styles that use your Unarmed Strike and Monk Weapons, which are the following:

Simple Melee weapons
Martial Melee weapons that have the Light property
You gain the following benefits while you are unarmed or wielding only Monk Weapons and you aren’t wearing armor or wielding a Shield:

Bonus Unarmed Strike. You can make one Unarmed Strike as a Bonus Action.
Martial Arts Die. You can roll 1d6 in place of the normal damage of your Unarmed Strike or Monk Weapons. This die changes as you gain Monk levels, as shown in the Martial Arts column of the Monk table.
Dexterous Attacks. You can use Dexterity modifier instead of Strength modifier for the attack and damage rolls of your Unarmed Strikes and Monk Weapons. In addition, when you choose the Grapple or Shove option of your Unarmed Strike, you can use your Dexterity modifier instead of Strength modifier to determine the save DC.
1ST LEVEL: UNARMORED DEFENSE
While you aren’t wearing any armor or wielding a Shield, your base Armor Class equals 10 + your Dexterity modifier + your Wisdom modifier.

2ND LEVEL: MONK’S DISCIPLINE
Your focus and martial training allow you to harness a well of extraordinary energy within yourself. This energy is represented by Focus Points. Your Monk level determines the number of points you have, as shown in the Focus Points column of the Monk table. You can expend these points to enhance or fuel certain Monk features. You start knowing three such features: Flurry of Blows, Patient Defense, and Step of the Wind, each of which is detailed below. When you expend a Focus Point, it is unavailable until you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest, at the end of which you regain all your expended points. Some features that use Focus Points require your target to make a saving throw. The saving throw DC equals 8 + your Proficiency Bonus + your Wisdom modifier.

Flurry of Blows. You can expend 1 Focus Point to make two Unarmed Strikes as a Bonus Action.
Patient Defense. You can take the Disengage Action as a Bonus Action. Alternatively, you can spend 1 Focus Point to take both the Disengage and the Dodge actions as a Bonus Action.
Step of the Wind. You can take the Dash action as a Bonus Action. Alternatively, you can spend 1 Focus Point to take both the Disengage and Dash actions as a Bonus Action, and your jump distance is doubled for the turn.
2ND LEVEL: UNARMORED MOVEMENT
Your speed increases by 10 feet while you aren’t wearing armor or wielding a Shield. This bonus increases when you reach certain Monk levels, as shown in the Monk table.

2ND LEVEL: UNCANNY METABOLISM
When you roll Initiative, you can regain all expended Focus Points. When you do so, roll your Martial Arts die, and regain a number of Hit Points equal to your Monk level + the number rolled. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest

3RD LEVEL: DEFLECT ATTACKS
When an attack roll hits you and its damage includes Bludgeoning, Piercing or Slashing damage, you can take a Reaction to reduce the attack's total damage against you. The reduction equals 1d10 + your Dexterity modifier + your Monk level.

If you reduce the damage to 0, you can expend 1 Focus Point to redirect some of the attack’s force. If you do so, choose a creature within 5 feet of you if the attack was a melee attack or a creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself that isn’t behind Total Cover if the attack was a ranged attack. That creature must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take damage equal to two rolls of your Martial Arts die + your Dexterity modifier. The damage is the same type dealt by the attack.

3RD LEVEL: MONK SUBCLASS
You gain a Monk subclass of your choice:

Warrior of Mercy
Warrior of Shadow
Warrior of the Elements
Warrior of the Open Hand
Warrior of the Astral Self (Non-Playtest)
Warrior of the Drunken Master (Non-Playtest)
Warrior of Kensei (Non-Playtest)
Warrior of Sun Soul (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description (for this playtest, use Way of Mercy from Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything for Warrior of Mercy). A subclass is a specialization that grants you special abilities at certain Monk levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Monk level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

4TH LEVEL: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Monk table, you gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16.

4TH LEVEL: SLOW FALL
You can use your Reaction when you fall to reduce any damage you take from the fall by an amount equal to five times your Monk level.

5TH LEVEL: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice, instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

5TH LEVEL: STUNNING STRIKE
Once per turn when you hit a creature with a Monk Weapon or an Unarmed Strike, you can spend 1 Focus Point to attempt a stunning strike. The target must make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the target has the Stunned condition until the start of your next turn. On a successful save, the target's Speed is halved until the start of your next turn and the next attack roll made against the target before then has Advantage.

6TH LEVEL: EMPOWERED STRIKES
Whenever you deal damage with your Unarmed Strike, it deals your choice of Force damage or its normal damage type.

7TH LEVEL: EVASION
When you are subjected to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, you instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving throw, and only half damage if you fail. You don’t benefit from this feature if you have the Incapacitated condition.

9TH LEVEL: ACROBATIC MOVEMENT
While you aren’t wearing armor or wielding a Shield, you gain the ability to move along vertical surfaces and across liquids on your turn without falling during the movement.

10TH LEVEL: HEIGHTENED FOCUS
Your training has pushed your body and mind to new levels. Your Flurry of Blows, Patient Defense, and Step of the Wind gain the following benefits:

Flurry of Blows. You can spend 1 Focus Point to use Flurry of Blows and make three Unarmed Strikes with it instead of two.
Patient Defense. When you spend a Focus Point to use Patient Defense, you gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to two rolls of your Martial Arts die.
Step of the Wind. When you expend a Focus Point to use Step of the Wind, you can choose a willing creature within 5 feet of yourself that is Large or smaller. You move the creature with you until the end of your turn. The creature’s movement doesn’t provoke Opportunity Attacks.
10TH LEVEL: SELF-RESTORATION
Through sheer force of will, you can remove one of the following conditions from yourself at the end of each of your turns: Charmed, Frightened, or Poisoned. In addition, forgoing food and drink doesn’t give you levels of Exhaustion.

13TH LEVEL: DEFLECT ENERGY
You can now use your Deflect Attacks feature against attacks that deal any damage type, not just Bludgeoning, Piercing, or Slashing.

14TH LEVEL: DISCIPLINED SURVIVOR
Your physical and mental discipline grant you proficiency in all saving throws. Additionally, whenever you make a saving throw and fail, you can spend 1 Focus Point to reroll it, you must use the new roll.

15TH LEVEL: PERFECT FOCUS
When you roll Initiative and don't use Uncanny Metabolism, you regain expended Focus Points until you have 4 if you have 3 or fewer.

18TH LEVEL: SUPERIOR DEFENSE
At the start of your turn, you can spend 3 Focus Points to bolster yourself against harm for 1 minute or until you have the Incapacitated condition. During that time, you have resistance to all damage except Force damage.

LEVEL 19: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Irresistible Offense is recommended.

20TH LEVEL: BODY AND MIND
You have developed your body and mind to new heights. Your Dexterity and Wisdom scores increase by 4, to a maximum of 25.
---------------------------
WARRIOR OF MERCY
Monks of the Way of Mercy learn to manipulate the life force of others to bring aid to those in need. They are wandering physicians to the poor and hurt. However, to those beyond their help, they bring a swift end as an act of mercy.

Those who follow the Way of Mercy might be members of a religious order, administering to the needy and making grim choices rooted in reality rather than idealism. Some might be gentle-voiced healers, beloved by their communities, while others might be masked bringers of macabre mercies.

The walkers of this way usually don robes with deep cowls, and they often conceal their faces with masks, presenting themselves as the faceless bringers of life and death.

LEVEL 3: IMPLEMENTS OF MERCY
You gain proficiency in the Insight and Medicine skills, and you gain proficiency with the Herbalism kit.

LEVEL 3: HANDS OF HEALING
As an Magic action, you can spend 1 Focus Point to touch a creature and restore a number of Hit Points equal to a roll of your Martial Arts die + your Wisdom modifier. When you use your Flurry of Blows, you can replace one of the Unarmed Strikes with a use of this feature without spending a Focus Point for the healing.

LEVEL 3: HANDS OF HARM
Once per turn when you hit a creature with an Unarmed Strike, you can spend 1 Focus Point to deal extra Necrotic damage equal to one roll of your Martial Arts die + your Wisdom modifier.

LEVEL 6: PHYSICIAN'S TOUCH
Your Hand of Harm and Hand of Healing improve as detailed below:

Hand of Harm. When you use Hand of Harm on a creature, you can also give that creature the Poisoned condition until the end of your next turn.
Hand of Healing. When you use Hand of Healing you can also end one of the following conditions on the creature you heal: Blinded, Deafened, Paralyzed, Poisoned or Stunned.
LEVEL 11: FLURRY OF HEALING AND HARM
When you use Flurry of Blows, you can now replace each of the Unarmed Strikes with a use of your Hand of Healing, without spending Focus Points for the healing. In addition, when you make an Unarmed Strike with Flurry of Blows and deal damage, you can use Hand of Harm with that strike without spending a Focus Point for Hands of Harm. You can still use Hands of Harm only once per turn.

You can use these benefits a total number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 17: HAND OF ULTIMATE MERCY
Your mastery of life energy opens the door to the ultimate mercy. As a Magic action, you can touch the corpse of a creature that died within the past 24 hours and expend 5 Focus Points. The creature then returns to life with a number of hit points equal to 4d10 + your Wisdom modifier. If the creature died with any of the following conditions, the creature revives with the conditions removed: Blinded, Deafened, Paralyzed, Poisoned and Stunned. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest.
---------------------------
WARRIOR OF SHADOW
Warriors of Shadow practice stealth and subterfuge, channeling their reservoirs of power to harness the power of the Shadowfell. They are at home in darkness, able to draw gloom around themselves to hide, to leap from shadow to shadow, and even to take on a wraithlike form of living shadow.

3RD LEVEL: SHADOW ARTS
You have learned to draw on the power of the Shadowfell, gaining the following benefits:

Darkness. You can expend 1 Focus Point to cast the Darkness spell without any spell components. You can see within the spell’s area when you cast it with this feature. While the spell persists, you can move its area of Darkness to a space within 60 feet of yourself at the start of each of your turns.
Darkvision. You gain Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision, its range increases by 60 feet.
Shadowy Figments. You know the Minor Illusion spell. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for it.
6TH LEVEL: SHADOW STEP
While entirely within Dim Light or Darkness, you can use a Bonus Action to teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space you can see that is also in Dim Light or Darkness. You then have Advantage on the next melee attack you make before the end of the current turn.

11TH LEVEL: IMPROVED SHADOW STEP
You can draw on your Shadowfell connection to empower your teleportation. When you use your Shadow Step, you can expend 1 Focus Point to remove the requirement that you must start and end in Dim Light or Darkness for that use of the feature. As part of this Bonus Action, you can make an Unarmed Strike immediately after the teleportation.

17TH LEVEL: CLOAK OF SHADOWS
As a Magic Action while entirely within Dim Light or Darkness, you can spend 3 Focus Points to shroud yourself with shadows for 1 minute, until you have the Incapacitated condition, or until you end your turn in Bright Light. While shrouded by these shadows, you gain the following benefits:

Invisibility. You have the Invisible condition.
Partially Incorporeal. You can move through occupied spaces as if they were Difficult Terrain. If you end your turn in such a space, you are shunted to the last unoccupied space you were in.
Shadow Flurry. You can use your Flurry of Blows without spending any Focus Points.
---------------------------
WARRIOR OF THE ELEMENTS
The tradition of the Four Elements encompasses Monks who tap into the power of the Elemental Planes through their practice of martial arts. Some of these Monks focus on a single element, learning to wreathe their fists in fire and cause explosive bursts of flame, or to wield mighty gusts of icy wind. Others weave the elements together and learn a variety of techniques to harness the appropriate elemental force for each particular circumstance.

3RD LEVEL: MANIPULATE ELEMENTS
You know the Elementalism spell. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for it.

3RD LEVEL: ELEMENTAL ATTUNEMENT
At the start of your turn, you can spend 1 Focus Point to imbue yourself with elemental energy. The energy lasts for 10 minutes or until you have the Incapacitated condition. You gain the following benefits while the feature is active:

Elemental Strikes. Whenever you hit with your Unarmed Strike, you can cause it to deal your choice of Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning or Thunder damage rather than its normal damage type. When you deal one of these types with it, you can also force the target to make a Strength saving throw. On a failed save, you can move the target up to 10 feet toward or away from you, as elemental energy swirls around it.
Reach. When you make an Unarmed Strike, your reach is 10 feet greater than normal, as elemental energy extends from you.
6TH LEVEL: ENVIRONMENTAL BURST
As a Magic Action, you can spend 2 Focus Points to cause environmental energy to burst in a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on a point within 120 feet of yourself. Choose a damage type: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning or Thunder. Each creature in the sphere must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes damage of the chosen type equal to three rolls of your Martial Arts die. On a successful save, a creature takes half as much damage.

11TH LEVEL: STRIDE OF THE ELEMENTS
While your Elemental Attunement is active, you also gain a Fly Speed and a Swim Speed equal to your Speed.

17TH LEVEL: ELEMENTAL EPITOME
When your Elemental Attunement is active, you also gain the following benefits:

Damage Resistance. You gain Resistance to one of the following damage types of your choice: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning or Thunder. At the start of each of your turns, you can change this choice.
Destructive Stride. When you use your Step of the Wind, your Speed increases by 20 feet until the end of the turn. For that duration, any creature of your choice takes damage equal to one roll of your Martial Arts die when you enter a space within 5 feet of it. The damage type is your choice of Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning or Thunder. A creature can take this damage only once per turn.
Empowered Strikes. Once on each of your turns, you can deal extra damage to a target equal to one roll of your Martial Arts die when you hit it with an Unarmed Strike. The extra damage is the same type dealt by that strike.
---------------------------
WARRIOR OF THE HAND
Warriors of the Hand are masters of unarmed combat. They learn techniques to push and trip their opponents and manipulate their own energy to protect themselves from harm.

3RD LEVEL: OPEN HAND TECHNIQUE
Whenever you hit a creature with an attack granted by your Flurry of Blows, you can impose one of the following effects on that target:

Addle. The target can’t make Opportunity Attacks until the start of its next turn.
Push. The target must succeed on a Strength saving throw, or you push it up to 15 feet away from yourself.
Topple. The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition.
6TH LEVEL: WHOLENESS OF BODY
You gain the ability to heal yourself. As a Bonus Action, you can roll your Martial Arts die. You regain a number of Hit Points equal to the number rolled plus your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 1 Hit Point regained). You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

11TH LEVEL: FLEET STEP
When you take a Bonus Action other than Step of the Wind, you can also use Step of the Wind immediately after that Bonus Action.

17TH LEVEL: QUIVERING PALM
You gain the ability to set up lethal vibrations in someone’s body. When you hit a creature with an Unarmed Strike, you can spend 4 Focus Points to start these imperceptible vibrations, which last for a number of days equal to your Monk level. The vibrations are harmless unless you use your Action to end them. Alternatively, when you take the Attack action on your turn, you can forgo one of the attacks to end the vibrations. To end them, you and the target must be on the same plane of existence.

When you end them, the target must make a Constitution saving throw, taking 10d12 Force damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. You can have only one creature under the effect of this feature at a time. You can end the vibrations harmlessly (no action required).
---------------------------
Warrior of the Astral Self
A monk of the Astral Self believes their body is an illusion. They see their ki as a representation of their true form, an astral self. This astral self has the capacity to be a force of order or disorder, with some monasteries training students to use their power to protect the weak and other instructing aspirants in how to manifest their true selves in service to the mighty.

LEVEL 3: ARMS OF THE ASTRAL SELF
Your mastery of your ki allows you to summon a portion of your astral self. As a bonus action, you can spend 1 ki point to summon the arms of your astral self. When you do so, each creature of your choice that you can see within 10 feet of you must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take force damage equal to two rolls of your Martial Arts die. For 10 minutes, these spectral arms hover near your shoulders or surround your arms (your choice). You determine the arms' appearance, and they vanish early if you are incapacitated or die. While the spectral arms are present, you gain the following benefits:

You can use your Wisdom modifier in place of your Strength modifier when making Strength checks and Strength saving throws.
You can use the spectral arms to make unarmed strikes.
When you make an unarmed strike with the arms on your turn, your reach for it is 5 feet greater than normal.
The unarmed strikes you make with the arms can use your Wisdom modifier in place of your Strength or Dexterity modifier for the attack and damage rolls, and their damage type is force.
LEVEL 6: VISAGE OF THE ASTRAL SELF
You can summon the visage of your astral self. As a bonus action, or as part of the bonus action you take to activate Arms of the Astral Self, you can spend 1 ki point to summon this visage for 10 minutes. It vanishes early if you are incapacitated or die. The spectral visage covers your face like a helmet or mask. You determine its appearance. While the spectral visage is present, you gain the following benefits.

Astral Sight. You can see normally in darkness, both magical and non-magical, to a distance of 120 feet.
Wisdom of the Spirit. You have advantage on Wisdom (Insight) and Charisma (Intimidation) checks.
Word of the Spirit. When you speak, you can direct your words to a creature of your choice that you can see within 60 feet of you, making it so only that creature can hear you. Alternatively, you can amplify your voice so that all creatures within 600 feet can hear you.
LEVEL 11: BODY OF THE ASTRAL SELF
When you have both your astral arms and visage summoned, you can cause the body of your astral self to appear (no action required). This spectral body covers your physical form like a suit of armor, connecting with the arms and visage. You determine its appearance. While the spectral body is present, you gain the following benefits.

Deflect Energy. When you take acid, cold, fire, force, lightning, or thunder damage, you can use your reaction to deflect it. When you do so, the damage you take is reduced by 1d10 + your Wisdom modifier (minimum reduction of 1).
Empowered Arms. Once on each of your turns when you hit a target with the Arms of the Astral Self, you can deal extra damage to the target equal to your Martial Arts die.
LEVEL 17: AWAKENED ASTRAL SELF
Your connection to your astral self is complete, allowing you to unleash its full potential. As a bonus action, you can spend 5 ki points to summon the arms, visage, and body of your astral self and awaken it for 10 minutes. This awakening ends early if you are incapacitated or die. While your astral self is awakened, you gain the following benefits.

Armor of the Spirit. You gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class.
Astral Barrage. Whenever you use the Extra Attack feature to attack twice, you can instead attack three times if all the attacks are made with your astral arms.
---------------------------
Warrior of the Drunken Master
The Way of the Drunken Master teaches its students to move with the jerky, unpredictable movements of a drunkard. A drunken master sways, tottering on unsteady feet, to present what seems like an incompetent combatant who proves frustrating to engage. The drunken master’s erratic stumbles conceal a carefully executed dance of blocks, parries, advances, attacks, and retreats. A drunken master often enjoys playing the fool to bring gladness to the despondent or to demonstrate humility to the arrogant, but when battle is joined, the drunken master can be a maddening, masterful foe.

LEVEL 3: BONUS PROFICINCIES
You gain proficiency in the Performance skill if you don't already have it. Your martial arts technique mixes combat training with the precision of a dancer and the antics of a jester. You also gain proficiency with brewer's supplies if you don't already have it.

LEVEL 3: DRUNKEN TECHNIQUE
You learn how to twist and turn quickly as part of your Flurry of Blows. Whenever you use Flurry of Blows, you gain the benefit of the Disengage action, and your walking speed increases by 10 feet until the end of the current turn.

LEVEL 6: TIPSY SWAY
You can move in sudden, swaying ways. You gain the following benefits.

Leap to Your Feet. When you're prone, you can stand up by spending 5 feet of movement, rather than half your speed.
Redirect Attack. When a creature misses you with a melee attack roll, you can spend 1 ki point as a reaction to cause that attack to hit one creature of your choice, other than the attacker, that you can see within 5 feet of you.
LEVEL 11: DRUNKARD'S LUCK
You always seem to get a lucky bounce at the right moment. When you make an ability check, an attack roll, or a saving throw and have disadvantage, you can spend 2 ki points to cancel the disadvantage for that roll.

LEVEL 17: INTOXICATED FRENZY
You gain the ability to make an overwhelming number of attacks against a group of enemies. When you use your Flurry of Blows, you can make up to three additional attacks with it (up to a total of five Flurry of Blows attacks), provided that each Flurry of Blows attack targets a different creature this turn.
---------------------------
Warrior of the Kensei
Monks of the Way of Kensei train relentlessly with their weapons, to the point that the weapon becomes like an extension of the body. Founded on a mastery of sword fighting, the tradition has expanded to include many different weapons. A kensei sees a weapon much in the same way a calligrapher or a painter regards a pen or brush. Whatever the weapon, the kensei views it as a tool used to express the beauty and precision of the martial arts. That such mastery makes a kensei a peerless warrior is but a side effect of intense devotion, practice, and study.

LEVEL 3: PATH OF THE KENSEI
Your special martial arts training leads you to master the use of certain weapons. This path also includes instruction in the deft strokes of calligraphy or painting. You gain the following benefits:

Kensei Weapons. Choose two types of weapons to be your kensei weapons: one melee weapon and one ranged weapon. Each of these weapons can be any simple or martial weapon that lacks the heavy and special properties. The longbow is also a valid choice. You gain proficiency with these weapons if you don't already have it. Weapons of the chosen types are monk weapons for you. Many of this tradition's features work only with your kensei weapons. When you reach 6th, 11th, and 17th level in this class, you can choose another type of weapon – either melee or ranged – to be a kensei weapon for you, following the criteria above.
Agile Parry. If you make an unarmed strike as part of the Attack action on your turn and are holding a kensei weapon, you can use it to defend yourself if it is a melee weapon. You gain a +2 bonus to AC until the start of your next turn, while the weapon is in your hand and you aren’t incapacitated.
Kensei's Shot. You can use a bonus action on your turn to make your ranged attacks with a kensei weapon more deadly. When you do so, any target you hit with a ranged attack using a kensei weapon takes an extra 1d4 damage of the weapon’s type. You retain this benefit until the end of the current turn.
Way of the Brush. You gain proficiency with your choice of calligrapher's supplies or painter's supplies.
LEVEL 6: ONE WITH THE BLADE
You extend your ki into your kensei weapons, granting you the following benefits.

Magic Kensei Weapons. Your attacks with your kensei weapons count as magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and immunity to non-magical attacks and damage.
Deft Strike. When you hit a target with a kensei weapon, you can spend 1 ki point to cause the weapon to deal extra damage to the target equal to your Martial Arts die. You can use this feature only once on each of your turns.
LEVEL 11: SHARPEN THE BLADE
You gain the ability to augment your weapons further with your ki. As a bonus action, you can expend up to 3 ki points to grant one kensei weapon you touch a bonus to attack and damage rolls when you attack with it. The bonus equals the number of ki points you spent. This bonus lasts for 1 minute or until you use this feature again. This feature has no effect on a magic weapon that already has a bonus to attack and damage rolls.

LEVEL 17: UNERRING ACCURACY
Your mastery of weapons grants you extraordinary accuracy. If you miss with an attack roll using a monk weapon on your turn, you can reroll it. You can use this feature only once on each of your turns.
---------------------------
Way of the Sun Soul
Monks of the Way of the Sun Soul learn to channel their own life energy into searing bolts of light. They teach that meditation can unlock the ability to unleash the indomitable light shed by the soul of every living creature.

LEVEL 3: RADIANT SUN BOLT
You can hurl searing bolts of magical radiance. You gain a new attack option that you can use with the Attack action. This special attack is a ranged spell attack with a range of 30 feet. You are proficient with it, and you add your Dexterity modifier to its attack and damage rolls. Its damage is radiant, and its damage die is a d4. This die changes as you gain monk levels, as shown in the Martial Arts column of the Monk table. When you take the Attack action on your turn and use this special attack as part of it, you can spend 1 ki point to make the special attack twice as a bonus action. When you gain the Extra Attack feature, this special attack can be used for any of the attacks you make as part of the Attack action.

LEVEL 6: SEARING ARC STRIKE
You gain the ability to channel your ki into searing waves of energy. Immediately after you take the Attack action on your turn, you can spend 2 ki points to cast the Burning Hands spell as a bonus action. You can spend additional ki points to cast Burning Hands as a higher level spell. Each additional ki point you spend increases the spell's level by 1. The maximum number of ki points (2 plus any additional points) that you can spend on the spell equals half your monk level.

LEVEL 11: SEARING SUNBURST
You gain the ability to create an orb of light that erupts into a devastating explosion. As an action, you magically create an orb and hurl it at a point you choose within 150 feet, where it erupts into a sphere of radiant light for a brief but deadly instant. Each creature in that 20-foot-radius sphere must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or take 2d6 radiant damage. A creature doesn't need to make the save if the creature is behind total cover that is opaque. You can increase the sphere's damage by spending ki points. Each point you spend, up to a maximum of 3, increases the damage by 2d6.

LEVEL 17: SUN SHIELD
You become wreathed in a luminous, magical aura. You shed bright light in a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet. You can extinguish or restore the light as a bonus action. If a creature hits you with a melee attack while this light shines, you can use your reaction to deal radiant damage to the creature. The radiant damage equals 5 + your Wisdom modifier.
=========================
PALADIN
Primary Abilities: Strength, Charisma

Paladins are united by their oaths to stand against the forces of annihilation and corruption. Whether sworn before a god’s altar, in a sacred glade before nature spirits and fey beings, or in a moment of desperation and grief with the dead as the only witnesses, a Paladin’s oath is a powerful bond. It is a source of power that turns a devout warrior into a blessed champion.

A Paladin swears to stand against corrupting influences and to hunt the forces of ruin wherever they lurk. Different Paladins focus on various aspects of these causes, but all are bound by the oaths that grant them power to do their sacred work.

Paladins train to learn the skills of combat, mastering a variety of weapons and armor. Even so, their martial skills are secondary to the magical power they wield—power to heal the sick and injured, to smite their foes, and to protect the helpless and those who fight at their side.

Almost by definition, the life of a Paladin is an adventuring life, for every Paladin lives on the front lines of the cosmic struggle against annihilation. Fighters are rare enough among the ranks of a world’s armies, but even fewer people can claim the calling of a Paladin. When they do receive the call, these blessed folk turn from their former occupations and take up arms and magic. Sometimes their oaths lead them into the service of the crown as leaders of elite groups of knights, but even then, their loyalty is first to their sacred oaths, not to crown and country.

Adventuring Paladins take their work seriously. A delve into an ancient ruin or a dusty crypt can be a quest driven by a higher purpose than the acquisition of treasure. Malign forces lurk in dungeons, and even the smallest victory against them can tilt the cosmic balance away from oblivion.

CREATING A PALADIN
To create a Paladin, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a 1st-level character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Paladin” sidebar.

Then look at the Paladin table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. The descriptions of those features appear in the “Paladin Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d10 per Paladin level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 10 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Level after 1st: 1d10 (or 6) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills (Choose 2): Athletics, Insight, Intimidation, Medicine, Persuasion, Religion
Weapons: Simple Weapons, Martial Weapons
Tools: None
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor, Medium Armor, Heavy Armor, Shields

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a 1st-level character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 150 GP on equipment of your choice.

Chain Mail
Holy Symbol
Javelin (x6)
Longsword
Priest’s Pack
Shield
9 GP
BREAKING YOUR OATH
A Paladin tries to hold to the highest standards of conduct, but even the most dedicated are fallible. Sometimes a Paladin transgresses their oath. A Paladin who has broken a vow typically seeks absolution, spending an all-night vigil as a sign of penitence or undertaking a fast. After a rite of forgiveness, the Paladin starts fresh.

If your Paladin unrepentantly violates their oath, talk to your DM. Your Paladin should probably take a more appropriate subclass or even abandon the class and adopt another one.

MULTICLASSING AND THE PALADIN
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Paladin as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Paladin’s primary abilities—Strength and Charisma—to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you are already a Paladin.
Proficiencies Gained. If Paladin isn’t your initial class, you gain proficiency with Martial Weapons when you take your first Paladin level.
Armor Training. When you gain your first Paladin level, you gain armor training with the following: Light Armor, Medium Armor, and Shields.
Spell Slots. Add half your Paladin levels (rounded up) to the appropriate levels from other classes to determine your available spell slots for casting spells, as detailed in the multiclassing rules. You prepare spells for each of your classes individually, referring to the spell slots of an individual class to determine the number and levels of the spells you prepare for it.
Channel Divinity. If you have more than one class with the Channel Divinity feature, a class’s uses of the feature can be expended only on that class’s Channel Divinity options.
PALADIN CLASS FEATURES
As a Paladin, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Paladin table.



1ST LEVEL: LAY ON HANDS
Your blessed touch can heal wounds. You have a pool of healing power that replenishes when you finish a Long Rest. With that pool, you can restore a total number of Hit Points equal to five times your Paladin level. As a Bonus Action, you can touch a creature (which could be yourself) and draw power from the pool of healing to restore a number of Hit Points to that creature, up to the maximum amount remaining in the pool. In addition, you can expend 5 Hit Points from the pool of healing power to remove the Poisoned condition from the creature; those points don't also restore Hit Points to the creature.

1ST LEVEL: SPELLCASTING
You have learned to cast spells through prayer, meditation, and devotion. See the Player’s Handbook for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as a Paladin.

Spell Slots. The Paladin table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest.
Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose two level 1 spells from the Paladin spell list. Heroism and Searing Smite are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Paladin levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Paladin table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Paladin spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a 5th-level Paladin, your list of prepared spells can include six Paladin spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If another Paladin feature gives spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells on the list you prepare with this Spellcasting feature, but those spells otherwise follow the rules in this feature.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one spell on your list with another Paladin spell for which you have spell slots.
Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is your Spellcasting Ability for your Paladin spells.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Holy Symbol as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you prepare for this class.
1ST LEVEL: WEAPON MASTERY
Your training with weapons allows you to use the Mastery property of two kinds of weapons of your choice with which you have proficiency, such as Longswords and Javelins. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change the kinds of weapons you chose. For example, you could switch to using the Mastery properties of Halberds and Flails.

2ND LEVEL: FIGHTING STYLE
You gain one of the following Fighting Style feats of your choice. Instead of choosing one of those feats, you can choose the option below.

Blessed Warrior. You learn two Cleric cantrips of your choice of your choice. Guidance and Sacred Flame are recommended. The chosen cantrips count as Paladin spells for you and Charisma is your spellcasting ability for them. Whenever you gain a Paladin level, you can replace one of these cantrips with another Cleric cantrip.
2ND LEVEL: PALADIN’S SMITE
You always have the Divine Smite spell prepared. In addition, you can cast it from this feature once without expending a spell slot, and you must finish a Long Rest before you can cast it this way again.

3RD LEVEL: CHANNEL DIVINITY
You can channel divine energy directly from the Outer Planes, using that energy to fuel magical effects. You start with one such effect: Divine Sense, which is described below. Other Paladin features give additional Channel Divinity effect options. Each time you use this Channel Divinity, you choose which effect from this class to create.

You can use this class's Channel Divinity twice. You regain one of its expended uses when you finish a Short Rest and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You gain an additional use when you reach Paladin level 11. If a Channel Divinity effect requires a saving throw, the DC equals the Spell Save DC from this class’s Spellcasting feature.

Divine Sense. As a Bonus Action, you can open your awareness to detect Celestials, Fiends, and Undead. For the next 10 minutes or until you have the Incapacitated condition, you know the location of any creature of those types within 60 feet of yourself, and you know its creature type. Within the same radius, you also detect the presence of any place or object that has been consecrated or desecrated, as with the Hallow spell.
3RD LEVEL: PALADIN SUBCLASS
You gain a Paladin subclass of your choice:

Oath of Devotion
Oath of Glory
Oath of the Ancients
Oath of Vengeance
Oath of Conquest (Non-Playtest)
Oath of Redemption (Non-Playtest)
Oath of the Watchers (Non-Playtest)
Oathbreaker (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special abilities at certain Paladin levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Paladin level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

4TH LEVEL: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16.

5TH LEVEL: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice, instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

5TH LEVEL: FAITHFUL STEED
You can call on the aid of an otherworldly steed. You always have the Find Steed spell prepared. You can also cast the spell once without expending a spell slot, and you regain the ability to do so when you finish a Long Rest.

6TH LEVEL: AURA OF PROTECTION
You radiate a protective, unseeable aura in a 10-foot Emanation that originates from you. The aura is inactive while you have the Incapacitated condition. You and your allies in the aura gain a bonus to saving throws equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum bonus of +1). If another Paladin is present, a creature can benefit from only one Aura of Protection at a time; the creature chooses which aura while in them.

9TH LEVEL: ABJURE FOES
As a Magic Action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to overwhelm foes with divine awe. As you present your Holy Symbol or weapon, you can target a number of creatures equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature) that you can see within 60 feet of yourself. Each target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Frightened condition for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. While Frightened in this way, a target can do only one of the following on its turns: move, take an action or take a Bonus Action.

10TH LEVEL: AURA OF COURAGE
You and your allies have immunity to the Frightened condition while in your Aura of Protection. If a Frightened ally enters the aura, that condition has no effect on that ally while there.

11TH LEVEL: RADIANT STRIKES
Your strikes now carry supernatural power. When you hit a target with an attack roll using a melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike, the target takes an extra 1d8 Radiant damage.

14TH LEVEL: RESTORING TOUCH
When you use Lay on Hands on a creature, you can also remove one or more of the following conditions from the creature: Blinded, Charmed, Deafened, Frightened, Paralyzed or Stunned. You must expend 5 Hit Points from the healing pool of Lay on Hands for each of these conditions you remove; those points don’t also restore Hit Points to the creature.

18TH LEVEL: AURA EXPANSION
Your Aura of Protection is now a 30-foot Emanation.

19TH LEVEL: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Truesight is recommended.
---------------------------
OATH OF DEVOTION
The Oath of Devotion binds Paladins to the loftiest ideals of justice and order. These Paladins meet the ideal of the knight in shining armor. They hold themselves to the highest standards of conduct, and some, for better or worse, hold the rest of the world to the same standards. Many who swear this oath are devoted to gods of law and good and use their gods’ tenets as the measure of their devotion. They hold angels as their ideals and incorporate images of angelic wings into their helmets or coats of arms.

TENETS OF DEVOTION
Though the exact words and strictures of the Oath of Devotion vary, Paladins of this oath share these tenets.

Honesty. Don’t lie or cheat. Let your word be your promise.
Courage. Never fear to act, though caution is wise.
Compassion. Aid others, protect the weak, and punish those who threaten them. Show mercy to your foes, but temper it with wisdom.
Honor. Treat others with fairness, and let your honorable deeds be an example to them.
Duty. Be responsible for your actions and their consequences, protect those entrusted to your care, and obey those who have just authority over you.
3RD LEVEL: OATH SPELLS
The magic of your oath ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Paladin level specified in the Oath of Devotion Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

OATH OF DEVOTION SPELLS
Paladin Level	Spells
3rd	Protection from Evil and Good, Shield of Faith
5th	Aid, Zone of Truth
9th	Beacon of Hope, Dispel Magic
13th	Freedom of Movement, Guardian of Faith
17th	Commune, Flame Strike
3RD LEVEL: SACRED WEAPON
When you take the Attack action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to imbue one melee weapon that you are holding with positive energy. For 10 minutes or until you use this feature again, you can add your Charisma modifier to attack rolls you make with that weapon (minimum bonus of +1), and each time you hit with it, you cause it to deal its normal damage type or Radiant damage. The weapon also emits Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light 20 feet beyond that. You can end this effect early (no action required). This effect also ends if you aren’t carrying the weapon.

7TH LEVEL: AURA OF DEVOTION
You and your allies have Immunity to the Charmed condition while in your Aura of Protection. If a Charmed ally enters the aura, that condition has no effect on that ally while there.

15TH LEVEL: SMITE OF PROTECTION
Your magical smites now radiate protective energy. Whenever you cast Divine Smite, you and your allies have Half Cover while in your Aura of Protection. The aura has this benefit until the start of your next turn.

20TH LEVEL: HOLY NIMBUS
As a Bonus Action, you can imbue your Aura of Protection with holy power, granting the benefits below for 10 minutes or until you end them (no action required). Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 5 spell slot (no action required).

Holy Ward. You have Advantage on any saving throw you are forced to make by a Fiend or an Undead.
Radiant Damage. Whenever an enemy starts its turn in the aura, that creature takes Radiant damage equal to your Proficiency Bonus + your Charisma modifier.
Sunlight. The aura is filled with Bright Light that is sunlight.
---------------------------
OATH OF GLORY
Paladins who take the Oath of Glory believe they and their companions are destined to achieve glory through deeds of heroism. They train diligently and encourage their companions so they’re all ready when destiny calls.

TENETS OF GLORY
Though the exact words and strictures of the Oath of Glory vary, Paladins of this oath share these tenets.

Actions over Words. Strive to be known by glorious deeds, not words.
Challenges Are but Tests. Face hardships with courage, and encourage your allies to face them with you.
Hone the Body. Like raw stone, your body must be worked so its potential can be realized.
Discipline the Soul. You must marshal the discipline to overcome failings within yourself that threaten to dim the glory of you and your friends.
3RD LEVEL: OATH SPELLS
The magic of your oath ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Paladin level specified in the Oath of Glory Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

OATH OF GLORY SPELLS
Paladin Level	Spells
3rd	Guiding Bolt, Heroism
5th	Enhance Ability, Magic Weapon
9th	Haste, Protection from Energy
13th	Compulsion, Freedom of Movement
17th	Legend Lore, Yolande's Regal Presence
3RD LEVEL: INSPIRING SMITE
Immediately after you cast Divine Smite, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity and distribute Temporary Hit Points to creatures of your choice within 30 feet of yourself, which can include you. The total number of Temporary Hit Points equals 2d8 + your Paladin level, divided among the chosen creatures however you like.

3RD LEVEL: PEERLESS ATHLETE
As a Bonus Action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to augment your athleticism. For 1 hour, you have Advantage on Strength (Athletics) and Dexterity (Acrobatics) checks and the distance of your Long and High Jumps increases by 10 feet (this extra distance costs movement as normal).

7TH LEVEL: AURA OF ALACRITY
Your Speed increases by 10 feet. In addition, whenever an ally enters your Aura of Protection for the first time on a turn or starts their turn there, the ally's Speed increases by 10 feet until the end of their next turn.

15TH LEVEL: GLORIOUS DEFENSE
You can turn defense into a sudden strike. When you or another creature you can see within 10 feet of you is hit by an attack roll, you can use your Reaction to grant a bonus to the target’s AC against that attack, potentially causing it to miss. The bonus equals your Charisma modifier (minimum of +1). If the attack misses, you can make one attack with a weapon against the attacker as part of this Reaction if the attacker is within your weapon’s range. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

20TH LEVEL: LIVING LEGEND
You can empower yourself with the legends—whether true or exaggerated—of your great deeds. As a Bonus Action, you gain the benefits below for 10 minutes. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 5 spell slot (no action required).

Charismatic. You are blessed with an otherworldly presence, gaining Advantage on all Charisma checks.
Saving Throw Reroll. If you fail a saving throw, you can use your Reaction to reroll it. You must use this new roll.
Unerring Strike. Once on each of your turns when you make an attack roll with a weapon and miss, you can cause that attack to hit instead.
---------------------------
OATH OF THE ANCIENTS
The Oath of the Ancients is as old as the first elves and the rituals of Druids. Paladins who swear this oath cherish the light; they love the beautiful and life-giving things of the world more than any principles of honor, courage, and justice. They adorn their armor and clothing with images of growing things—leaves, antlers, or flowers—to reflect their commitment to preserving life and light in the world.

TENETS OF THE ANCIENTS
Though the exact words and strictures of the Oath of Ancients vary, Paladins of this oath share these tenets.

Kindle the Light. Through your acts of mercy, kindness, and forgiveness, kindle the light of hope in the world, beating back despair.
Shelter the Light. Where life flourishes, stand against the forces that would render it barren.
Preserve Your Own Light. Delight in song, laughter, and art. If you allow the light to die in your own heart, you can’t preserve it in the world.
Be the Light. Be a glorious beacon for all who live in despair. Let the light of your joy and courage shine forth in all your deeds.
3RD LEVEL: OATH SPELLS
The magic of your oath ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Paladin level specified in the Oath of the Ancients Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

OATH OF THE ANCIENTS SPELLS
Paladin Level	Spells
3rd	Ensnaring Strike, Speak with Animals
5th	Misty Step, Moonbeam
9th	Plant Growth, Protection from Energy
13th	Ice Storm, Stoneskin
17th	Commune with Nature, Tree Stride
3RD LEVEL: NATURE’S WRATH
As a Magic Action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to conjure spectral vines around nearby creatures. Each creature of your choice that you can see within 15 feet of yourself must succeed on a Strength saving throw or have the Restrained condition for 1 minute. A Restrained creature repeats the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.

7TH LEVEL: AURA OF WARDING
Ancient magic lies so heavily upon you that it forms an eldritch ward, blunting energy from beyond the Material Plane. You and your allies have resistance to Necrotic, Psychic, and Radiant damage while in your Aura of Protection.

15TH LEVEL: UNDYING SENTINEL
When you are reduced to 0 Hit Points and not killed outright, you can drop to 1 Hit Point instead, and you regain a number of Hit Points equal to three times your Paladin level. Once you use this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest. Additionally, and you can’t be aged magically and you cease visibly aging.

20TH LEVEL: ELDER CHAMPION
As a Bonus Action, you can imbue your Aura of Protection with primal power, granting the following benefits for 1 minute or until you end them (no action required). Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 5 spell slot (no action required).

Diminish Defiance. Enemies in the aura have Disadvantage on saving throws against your spells and Channel Divinity options.
Regeneration. At the start of each of your turns, you regain 10 Hit Points.
Swift Spells. Whenever you cast a spell that has a casting time of 1 action, you can cast it using a Bonus Action instead.
---------------------------
OATH OF VENGEANCE
The Oath of Vengeance is a solemn commitment to punish those who have committed grievously evil acts. When evil armies slaughter helpless villagers, when a tyrant defies the will of the gods, when a thieves’ guild grows too violent and powerful, when a dragon rampages through the countryside—at times like these, paladins arise and swear an Oath of Vengeance to set right what has gone wrong.

TENETS OF VENGEANCE
Though the exact words and strictures of the Oath of Vengeance vary, Paladins of this oath share these tenets.

Fight the Greater Evil. Faced with a choice of fighting my sworn foes or combating a lesser evil, I choose the greater evil.
No Mercy for the Wicked. Ordinary foes might win my mercy, but my sworn enemies do not.
By Any Means Necessary. My qualms can’t get in the way of exterminating my foes.
Restitution. If my foes wreak ruin on the world, it is because I failed to stop them. I must help those harmed by my misdeeds.
3RD LEVEL: OATH SPELLS
The magic of your oath ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Paladin level specified in the Oath of Vengeance Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

OATH OF VENGEANCE SPELLS
Paladin Level	Spells
3rd	Bane, Hunter's Mark
5th	Hold Person, Misty Step
9th	Haste, Protection from Energy
13th	Banishment, Dimension Door
17th	Hold Monster, Scrying
3RD LEVEL: VOW OF ENMITY
When you take the Attack action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to utter a vow of enmity against a creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. You gain Advantage on attack rolls against the creature for 1 minute or until you use this feature again. If the creature drops to 0 Hit Points before the vow ends, you can transfer the vow to a different creature within 30 feet of yourself (no action required).

7TH LEVEL: RELENTLESS AVENGER
Your supernatural focus helps you close off a foe’s retreat. When you hit a creature with an Opportunity Attack, you can reduce the creature’s Speed to 0 until the end of the current turn. You can then move up to half your Speed as part of the same Reaction. This movement doesn’t provoke Opportunity Attacks.

15TH LEVEL: SOUL OF VENGEANCE
Immediately after a creature under the effect of your Vow of Enmity hits or misses with an attack roll, you can take a Reaction to make a melee attack against that creature if it’s within range.

20TH LEVEL: AVENGING ANGEL
As a Bonus Action, you the benefits below for 10 minutes or until you end them (no action required). Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 5 spell slot (no action required).

Flight. You sprout spectral wings on your back, have a Fly Speed of 60 feet can Hover.
Frightful Aura. Whenever an enemy starts its turn in your Aura of Protection, that creature must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Frightened condition for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. Attack rolls against the Frightened creature have Advantage.
---------------------------
Oath of Conquest
The Oath of Conquest calls to paladins who seek glory in battle and the subjugation of their enemies. It isn’t enough for these paladins to establish order. They must crush the forces of chaos. Sometimes called knight tyrants or iron mongers, those who swear this oath gather into grim orders that serve gods or philosophies of war and well-ordered might. Some of these paladins go so far as to consort with the powers of the Nine Hells, valuing the rule of law over the balm of mercy. The archdevil Bel, warlord of Avernus, counts many of these paladins – called hell knights – as his most ardent supporters. Hell knights cover their armor with trophies taken from fallen enemies, a grim warning to any who dare oppose them and the decrees of their lords. These knights are often most fiercely resisted by other paladins of this oath, who believe that the hell knights have wandered too far into darkness.

Tenets of Conquest
A paladin who takes this oath has the tenets of conquest seared on the upper arm.

Douse the Flame of Hope. It is not enough to merely defeat an enemy in battle. Your victory must be so overwhelming that your enemies’ will to fight is shattered forever. A blade can end a life. Fear can end an empire.
Rule with an Iron Fist. Once you have conquered, tolerate no dissent. Your word is law. Those who obey it shall be favored. Those who defy it shall be punished as an example to all who might follow.
Strength Above All. You shall rule until a stronger one arises. Then you must grow mightier and meet the challenge, or fall to your own ruin.
LEVEL 3: OATH SPELLS
You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed.

OATH OF CONQUEST SPELLS
Paladin Level	Spells
3rd	Armor of Agathys, Command
5th	Hold Person, Spiritual Weapon
9th	Bestow Curse, Fear
13th	Dominate Beast, Stoneskin
17th	Cloudkill, Dominate Person
LEVEL 3: CHANNEL DIVINITY
You gain the following two Channel Divinity options.

Conquering Presence. You can use your Channel Divinity to exude a terrifying presence. As an action, you force each creature of your choice that you can see within 30 feet of you to make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, a creature becomes frightened of you for 1 minute. The frightened creature can repeat this saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Guided Strike. You can use your Channel Divinity to strike with supernatural accuracy. When you make an attack roll, you can use your Channel Divinity to gain a +10 bonus to the roll. You make this choice after you see the roll, but before the DM says whether the attack hits or misses.
LEVEL 7: AURA OF CONQUEST
You constantly emanate a menacing aura while you’re not incapacitated. The aura extends 10 feet from you in every direction, but not through total cover. If a creature is frightened of you, its speed is reduced to 0 while in the aura, and that creature takes psychic damage equal to half your paladin level if it starts its turn there. At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.

LEVEL 15: SCORNFUL REBUKE
Those who dare to strike you are psychically punished for their audacity. Whenever a creature hits you with an attack, that creature takes psychic damage equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of 1) if you’re not incapacitated.

LEVEL 20: INVINCIBLE CONQUERER
You gain the ability to harness extraordinary martial prowess. As an action, you can magically become an avatar of conquest, gaining the following benefits for 1 minute:

You have resistance to all damage.
When you take the Attack action on your turn, you can make one additional attack as part of that action.
Your melee weapon attacks score a critical hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20.
Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
Oath of Redemption
The Oath of Redemption sets a paladin on a difficult path, one that requires a holy warrior to use violence only as a last resort. Paladins who dedicate themselves to this oath believe that any person can be redeemed and that the path of benevolence and justice is one that anyone can walk. These paladins face evil creatures in the hope of turning them to the light, and the paladins slay them only when such a deed will clearly save other lives. Paladins who follow this path are known as redeemers. While redeemers are idealists, they are no fools. Redeemers know that undead, demons, devils, and other supernatural threats can be inherently evil. Against such foes, the paladins bring the full wrath of their weapons and spells to bear. Yet the redeemers still pray that, one day, even creatures of wickedness will invite their own redemption.

Tenets of Redemption
The tenets of the Oath of Redemption hold a paladin to a high standard of peace and justice.

Peace. Violence is a weapon of last resort. Diplomacy and understanding are the paths to long-lasting peace.
Innocence. All people begin life in an innocent state, and it is their environment or the influence of dark forces that drives them to evil. By setting the proper example, and working to heal the wounds of a deeply flawed world, you can set anyone on a righteous path.
Patience. Change takes time. Those who have walked the path of the wicked must be given reminders to keep them honest and true. Once you have planted the seed of righteousness in a creature, you must work day after day to allow it to survive and then flourish.
Wisdom. Your heart and mind must stay clear, for eventually you will be forced to admit defeat. While every creature can be redeemed, some are so far along the path of evil that you have no choice but to end their lives for the greater good. Any such action must be carefully weighed and the consequences fully understood, but once you have made the decision, follow through with it knowing your path is just.
LEVEL 3: OATH SPELLS
You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed.

OATH OF REDEMPTION SPELLS
Paladin Level	Spells
3rd	Sanctuary, Sleep
5th	Calm Emotions, Hold Person
9th	Counterspell, Hypnotic Pattern
13th	Otiluke's Resilient Sphere, Stoneskin
17th	Hold Monster, Wall of Force
LEVEL 3: CHANNEL DIVINITY
You gain the following two Channel Divinity options.

Emissary of Peace. You can use your Channel Divinity to augment your presence with divine power. As a bonus action, you grant yourself a +5 bonus to Charisma (Persuasion) checks for the next 10 minutes.
Rebuke the Violent. You can use your Channel Divinity to rebuke those who use violence. Immediately after an attacker within 30 feet of you deals damage with an attack against a creature other than you, you can use your reaction to force the attacker to make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the attacker takes radiant damage equal to the damage it just dealt. On a successful save, it takes half as much damage.
LEVEL 7: AURA OF THE GUARDIAN
You can shield your allies from harm at the cost of your own health. When a creature within 10 feet of you takes damage, you can use your reaction to magically take that damage, instead of that creature taking it. This feature doesn't transfer any other effects that might accompany the damage, and this damage can't be reduced in any way. At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.

LEVEL 15: PROTECTIVE SPIRIT
A holy presence mends your wounds in combat. You regain hit points equal to 1d6 + half your paladin level if you end your turn in combat with fewer than half of your hit points remaining and you aren’t incapacitated.

LEVEL 20: EMISSARY OF REDEMPTION
You become an avatar of peace, which gives you the following benefits.

You have resistance to all damage dealt by other creatures (their attacks, spells, and other effects).
Whenever a creature damages you, it takes radiant damage equal to half the amount it dealt to you.
If you attack a creature, cast a spell on it, or deal damage to it by any means but this feature, neither benefit works against that creature until you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
Oath of the Watchers
The Oath of the Watchers binds paladins to protect mortal realms from the predations of extraplanar creatures, many of which can lay waste to mortal soldiers. Thus, the Watchers hone their minds, spirits, and bodies to be the ultimate weapons against such threats. Paladins who follow the Watchers' oath are ever vigilant in spotting the influence of extraplanar forces, often establishing a network of spies and informants to gather information on suspected cults. To a Watcher, keeping a healthy suspicion and awareness about one's surroundings is as natural as wearing armor in battle.

Tenets of the Watchers
A paladin who assumes the Oath of the Watchers swears to safeguard mortal realms from otherwordly threats.

Vigilance. The threats you face are cunning, powerful, and subversive. Be ever alert for their corruption.
Loyalty. Never accept gifts or favors from fiends or those who truck with them. Stay true to your order, your comrades, and your duty.
Discipline. You are the shield against the endless terrors that lie beyond the stars. Your blade must be forever sharp and your mind keen to survive what lies beyond.
LEVEL 3: OATH SPELLS
You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed.

OATH OF THE WATCHERS SPELLS
Paladin Level	Spells
3rd	Alarm, Detect Magic
5th	Moonbeam, See Invisibility
9th	Counterspell, Nondetection
13th	Aura of Purity, Banishment
17th	Hold Monster, Scrying
LEVEL 3: CHANNEL DIVINITY
You gain the following two Channel Divinity options. See the Sacred Oath class feature for how Channel Divinity works.

Watcher's Will. You can use your Channel Divinity to invest your presence with the warding power of your faith. As an action, you can choose a number of creatures you can see within 30 feet of you, up to a number equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). For 1 minute, you and the chosen creatures have advantage on Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws.
Abjure the Extraplanar. You can use your Channel Divinity to castigate unworldly beings. As an action, you present your holy symbol and each aberration, celestial, elemental, fey, or fiend within 30 feet of you that can hear you must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is turned for 1 minute or until it takes damage. A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly end its move in a space within 30 feet of you. For its action, it can use only the Dash action or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can take the Dodge action.
LEVEL 7: AURA OF THE SENTINEL
You emit an aura of alertness while you aren't incapacitated. When you and any creatures of your choice within 10 feet of you roll initiative, you all gain a bonus to initiative equal to your proficiency bonus. At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.

LEVEL 15: VIGILANT REBUKE
You've learned how to chastise anyone who dares wield beguilements against you and your wards. Whenever you or a creature you can see within 30 feet of you succeeds on an Intelligence, a Wisdom, or a Charisma saving throw, you can use your reaction to deal 2d8 + your Charisma modifier force damage to the creature that forced the saving throw.

LEVEL 20: MORTAL BULWARK
You manifest a spark of divine power in defense of the mortal realms. As a bonus action, you gain the following benefits for 1 minute:

You gain truesight with a range of 120 feet.
You have advantage on attack rolls against aberrations, celestials, elementals, fey, and fiends.
When you hit a creature with an attack roll and deal damage to it, you can also force it to make a Charisma saving throw against your spell save DC. On a failed save, the creature is magically banished to its native plane of existence if it's currently not there. On a successful save, the creature can't be banished by this feature for 24 hours.
Once you use this bonus action, you can't use it again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend a 5th-level spell slot to use it again.
---------------------------
Oathbreaker
An oathbreaker is a paladin who breaks their sacred oaths to pursue some dark ambition or serve an evil power. Whatever light burned in the paladin's heart been extinguished. Only darkness remains.

LEVEL 3: OATH SPELLS
You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed.

OATHBREAKER SPELLS
Paladin Level	Spells
3rd	Hellish Rebuke, Inflict Wounds
5th	Crown of Madness, Darkness
9th	Animate Dead, Bestow Curse
13th	Blight, Confusion
17th	Contagion, Dominate Person
LEVEL 3: CHANNEL DIVINITY
You gain the following two Channel Divinity options.

Control Undead. As an action, you target one undead creature you can see within 30 feet of you. The target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the target must obey your commands for the next 24 hours, or until you use this Channel Divinity option again. An undead whose challenge rating is equal to or greater than your paladin level is immune to this effect.
Dreadful Aspect. As an action, you channel the darkest emotions and focus them into a burst of magical menace. Each creature of your choice within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom saving throw if it can see you. On a failed save, the target is frightened of you for 1 minute. If a creature frightened by this effect ends its turn more than 30 feet away from you, it can attempt another Wisdom saving throw to end the effect on it.
LEVEL 7: AURA OF HATE
You, as well any fiends and undead within 10 feet of you, gain a bonus to melee weapon damage rolls equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of +1). A creature can benefit from this feature from only one paladin at a time. At 18th level, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.

LEVEL 15: SUPERNATURAL RESISTANCE
You gain resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from non-magical weapons.

LEVEL 20: DREAD LORD
You can, as an action, surround yourself with an aura of gloom that lasts for 1 minute. The aura reduces any bright light in a 30-foot radius around you to dim light. Whenever an enemy that is frightened by you starts its turn in the aura, it takes 4d10 psychic damage. Additionally, you and any creatures of your choosing in the aura are draped in deeper shadow. Creatures that rely on sight have disadvantage on attack rolls against creatures draped in this shadow. While the aura lasts, you can use a bonus action on your turn to cause the shadows in the aura to attack one creature. Make a melee spell attack against the target. If the attack hits, the target takes necrotic damage equal to 3d10 + your Charisma modifier. After activating the aura, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest.
=========================
RANGER
Primary Ability: Dexterity, Wisdom

Far from the bustle of cities, amid the trees of trackless forests and across wide plains, Rangers keep their unending watch.

Wanderers of the wilderness, Rangers specialize in facing monsters that threaten the world. Rangers learn to track their quarry as a predator does, moving stealthily through the wilds and hiding themselves in brush and rubble.

Thanks to their connection with nature, Rangers can also cast spells that harness the primal powers of the wilderness. A Ranger’s talents and magic are honed with deadly focus on the task of protecting the world from the ravages of monsters and tyrants.

CREATING A RANGER
To create a Ranger, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a 1st-level character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Ranger” section.

Then look at the Ranger table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. The descriptions of those features appear in the “Ranger Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d10 per Ranger level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 10 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Level after 1st: 1d10 (or 6) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Skills (Choose 3): Animal Handling, Athletics, Insight, Investigation, Nature, Perception, Stealth, Survival
Weapons: Simple Weapons, Martial Weapons
Tools: None
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor, Medium Armor, Shields

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a 1st-level character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 150 GP on equipment of your choice.

Arrows (x20)
Druidic Focus (Sprig of Mistletoe)
Explorer’s Pack
Longbow or Shortbow
Quiver
Scimitar
Shortsword
Studded Leather Armor
7 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE RANGER
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Ranger as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Ranger’s primary abilities, Dexterity and Wisdom, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you are already a Ranger.
Proficiencies Gained. If Ranger isn’t your initial class, here are the proficiencies you gain when you take your first Ranger level: Martial Weapons and one skill of your choice from the Ranger’s skill list.
Armor Training. When you gain your first Ranger level, you gain the following armor training: Light Armor, Medium Armor, and Shield.
Spell Slots. Add half your Ranger levels (rounded up) to the appropriate levels from other classes to determine your available spell slots for casting spells, as detailed in the multiclassing rules. You prepare spells for each of your classes individually, referring to the spell slots of an individual class to determine the number and levels of the spells you prepare for it.
RANGER CLASS FEATURES
As a Ranger, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Ranger table.



1ST LEVEL: SPELLCASTING
You have learned to channel the magical essence of nature to cast spells. See the Player’s Handbook for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules with Ranger spells.

Spell Slots. The Ranger table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest.
Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose two level 1 spells from the Ranger spell list. Cure Wounds and Ensnaring Strike are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Ranger levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Ranger table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Ranger spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a level 5 Ranger, your list of prepared spells can include six Ranger spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If another Ranger feature gives spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells on the list you prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Ranger spells for you.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one spell on your list with another Ranger spell for which you have spell slots.
Spellcasting Ability. Wisdom is your Spellcasting Ability for your Ranger spells.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you prepare for this class.
1ST LEVEL: WEAPON MASTERY
Your training with weapons allows you to use the Mastery property of two kinds of weapons of your choice with which you have proficiency, such as Longbows and Longswords. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change the kinds of weapons you chose. For example, you could switch to using the Mastery properties of Scimitars and Shortswords.

1ST LEVEL: FAVORED ENEMY
You always have the Hunter’s Mark spell prepared. You can cast it a number of times equal to your Proficiency Bonus without expending a spell slot, and you regain all expended uses of this ability when you finish a Long Rest.

2ND LEVEL: DEFT EXPLORER

Thanks to your travels, you gain the following benefits:

Expertise. Choose one of your proficiencies with which you lack Expertise. You gain Expertise in that skill.
Languages. You know two languages of your choice from the language tables.
2ND LEVEL: FIGHTING STYLE
You gain a Fighting Style feat of your choice. Instead of choosing one of those feats, you can choose the option below:

Druidic Warrior. You learn two Druid cantrips of your choice. Guidance and Starry Wisp are recommended. The chosen cantrips count as Ranger spells for you, and Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for them. Whenever you gain a Ranger level, you can replace one of these cantrips with another Druid cantrip.
3RD LEVEL: RANGER SUBCLASS
You gain a Ranger subclass of your choice:

Beast Master
Fey Wanderer
Gloom Stalker
Hunter
Horizon Walker (Non-Playtest)
Monster Slayer (Non-Playtest)
Swarmkeeper (Non-Playtest)
Drakewarden (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description (for this playtest, use Fey Wanderer from Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything). A subclass is a specialization that grants you special abilities at certain Ranger levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Ranger level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

4TH LEVEL: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Ranger table, you gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16.

5TH LEVEL: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice, instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

6TH LEVEL: ROVING
Your Speed increases by 10 feet while you aren’t wearing Heavy Armor. You also have a Climb Speed and a Swim Speed equal to your Speed.

9TH LEVEL: EXPERTISE
Choose two of your skill proficiencies with which you lack Expertise. You gain Expertise in those skills.

10TH LEVEL: TIRELESS
Primal forces now help fuel you on your journeys, granting you the following benefits:

Temporary Hit Points. As a Magic action, you can give yourself a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to 1d8 + your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 1). You can use this action a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.
Decrease Exhaustion. Whenever you finish a Short Rest, your Exhaustion level, if any, decreases by 1.
13TH LEVEL: RELENTLESS HUNTER
Taking damage can't break your Concentration on Hunter's Mark.

14TH LEVEL: NATURE’S VEIL
You invoke spirits of nature to magically hide yourself. As a Bonus Action, you can give yourself the Invisible condition until the end of your next turn. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

17TH LEVEL: PRECISE HUNTER
You have Advantage on attack rolls against the creature currently marked by your Hunter's Mark.

18TH LEVEL: FERAL SENSES
Your connection to the forces of nature grants you Blindsight with a range of 30 feet.

19TH LEVEL: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Dimensional Travel is recommended.

20TH LEVEL: FOE SLAYER
The damage die of your Hunter's Mark is a d10 rather than a d6.
---------------------------
BEAST MASTER
A Beast Master ranger forms a mystical bond with a special beast, drawing on primal magic and a deep attunement to the natural world.

3RD LEVEL: PRIMAL COMPANION
You magically summon a primal beast, which draws strength from your bond with nature. Choose its stat block below:

Beast of the Land
Beast of the Sea
Beast of the Sky
Whatever kind you choose, it bears primal markings, indicating its supernatural origin. The beast is friendly to you and your companions and obeys your commands. It vanishes if you die.

The Beast in Combat. In combat, the beast acts during your turn. It can move and use its Reaction on its own, but the only action it takes is the Dodge action, unless you take a Bonus Action to command it to take a different an action in its stat block or some other action. You can also sacrifice one of your Attacks when you take the Attack action to command the beast to take the Beast's Strike action. If you have the Incapacitated condition, the beast acts on its own and isn't limited to the Dodge action.
Restoring and Replacing the Beast. If the beast has died within the last hour, you can take a Magic action to touch it and expend a spell slot. The beast returns to life after 1 minute with all its Hit Points restored. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can summon a different primal beast which appears in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of you. You choose its stat block and appearance. If you already have a beast from this feature, it vanishes when the new one appears.
7TH LEVEL: EXCEPTIONAL TRAINING
When you use your Bonus Action to command your Primal Companion beast to take an Action, you can also command it to take the Dash, Disengage, Dodge, or Help action using its Bonus Action. In addition, whenever it hits with an attack and deals damage, it can deal your choice of Force damage or its normal damage type.

11TH LEVEL: BESTIAL FURY
When you command your Primal Companion beast to take the Beast's Strike action, the beast can use it twice. In addition, the first time each turn it hits a creature under the effect of your Hunter’s Mark spell, the beast deals extra Force damage equal to the bonus damage of that spell.

15TH LEVEL: SHARE SPELLS
When you cast a spell targeting yourself, you can also affect your Primal Companion beast with the spell if the beast is within 30 feet of you.
---------------------------
Fey Wanderer Conclave
A fey mystique surrounds you, thanks to the boon of an archfey, the shining fruit you ate from a talking tree, the magic spring you swam in, or some other auspicious event. However you acquired your fey magic, you are now a Fey Wanderer, a ranger who represents both the mortal and the fey realms. As you wander the multiverse, your joyful laughter brightens the hearts of the downtrodden, and your martial prowess strikes terror in your foes, for great is the mirth of the fey and dreadful is their fury.

3RD LEVEL: DREADFUL STRIKES
You can augment your weapon strikes with mind-scarring magic, drawn from the murky hollows of the Feywild. When you hit a creature with a weapon, you can deal an extra 1d4 psychic damage to the target, which can take this extra damage only once per turn. The extra damage increases to 1d6 when you reach Ranger level 11th level.

3RD LEVEL: FEY WANDERER MAGIC
When you reach a Ranger level specified in the Fey Wanderer Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

Fey Wanderer Spells
Ranger Level	Spell
3rd	Charm Person
5th	Misty Step
9th	Summon Fey
13th	Dimension Door
17th	Mislead
3RD LEVEL: OTHERWORLDLY GLAMOUR
Whenever you make a Charisma check, you gain a bonus to the check equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of +1). You also gain proficiency in one of the following skills of your choice: Deception, Performance or Persuasion.

7TH LEVEL: BEGUILING TWIST
The magic of the Feywild guards your mind. You have advantage on saving throws to avoid or end the Charmed or Frightened condition. In addition, whenever you or a creature you can see within 120 feet of you succeeds on a saving throw to avoid or end the Charmed or Frightened condition, you can take a Reaction to force a different creature you can see within 120 feet of you to make a Wisdom save against your spell save DC. On a failed save, the target is Charmed or Frightened (your choice) for 1 minute. The target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.

11TH LEVEL: FEY REINFORCEMENTS
You can cast Summon Fey without a Material component. You can also cast it once without using a spell slot, and you regain the ability to do so when you finish a Long Rest. Whenever you start casting the spell, you can modify it so that it doesn't require Concentration. If you do so, the spell's duration becomes 1 minute for that casting.

15TH LEVEL: MISTY WANDERER
You can cast Misty Step without expending a spell slot. You can do so a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. In addition, whenever you cast Misty Step, you can bring along one willing creature you can see within 5 feet of yourself. That creature teleports to an unoccupied space of your choice within 5 feet of your destination space.
---------------------------
GLOOM STALKER
Gloom Stalkers are at home in the darkest places, wielding magic drawn from the Shadowfell to combat enemies that lurk in darkness.

3RD LEVEL: DREAD AMBUSHER
You have mastered the art of creating frightening ambushes, granting you the following benefits:

Ambusher’s Leap. At the start of the first turn of each combat, your Speed increases by 10 feet until the end of that turn.
Dreadful Strike. When you attack a creature and hit it with a weapon, you can deal an extra 2d6 Psychic damage. You can use this benefit only once per turn, you can use it a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.
Initiative Bonus. When you roll Initiative, you can add your Wisdom modifier to the roll.
3RD LEVEL: GLOOM STALKER MAGIC
When you reach a Ranger level specified in the Gloom Stalker Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

GLOOM STALKER SPELLS
Ranger Level	Spells
3rd	Disguise Self
5th	Rope Trick
9th	Fear
13th	Greater Invisibility
17th	Seeming
3RD LEVEL: UMBRAL SIGHT
You have Darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision when you gain this feature, its range increases by 60 feet. You are also adept at evading creatures that rely on Darkvision. While entirely in Darkness, you have the Invisible condition to any creature that relies on Darkvision to see you in that darkness.

7TH LEVEL: IRON MIND
You have honed your ability to resist the mind-altering powers. You gain proficiency in Wisdom saving throws. If you already have this proficiency, you instead gain proficiency in Intelligence or Charisma saving throws (your choice).

11TH LEVEL: STALKER’S FLURRY
The Psychic damage of your Dreadful Strike becomes 2d8. In addition, when you use the Dreadful Strike effect of your Dread Ambusher feature, you can cause one of the following additional effects:

Sudden Strike. You can make another attack with the same weapon against a different creature that is within 5 feet of the original target and that is within the weapon’s range.
Mass Fear. The target and each creature within 10 feet of it must make a Wisdom saving throw against your Spell Save DC. On a failed save, a creature has the Frightened condition until the start of your next turn.
15TH LEVEL: SHADOWY DODGE
When a creature makes an attack roll against you, you can use your Reaction to impose Disadvantage on that roll. Whether the attack hits or misses, you can teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see.
---------------------------
HUNTER
You stalk prey in the wilds and elsewhere, using your abilities as a Hunter to protect nature and people everywhere from forces that would destroy them.

3RD LEVEL: HUNTER’S LORE
You can call on the forces of nature to reveal certain strengths and weaknesses of your prey. While a creature is marked by your Hunter’s Mark, you know whether that creature has any Immunities, Resistances or Vulnerabilities, and if the creature has any, you know what they are.

3RD LEVEL: HUNTER’S PREY
You gain one of the following feature options of your choice. Whenever you finish a Short or Long Rest, you can replace the chosen option with the other one.

Colossus Slayer. Your tenacity can wear down even the most resilient foes. When you hit a creature with a weapon, the weapon deals an extra 1d8 damage to the target if it’s missing any of its Hit Points. You can deal this extra damage only once per turn.
Horde Breaker. Once on each of your turns when you make an attack with a weapon, you can make another attack with the same weapon against a different creature that is within 5 feet of the original target, that is within the weapon’s range, and that you haven’t attacked this turn.
7TH LEVEL: DEFENSIVE TACTICS
You gain one of the following feature options of your choice. Whenever you finish a Short or Long Rest, you can replace the chosen option with the other one.

Escape the Horde. Opportunity Attacks have Disadvantage against you.
Multiattack Defense. When a creature hits you with an attack roll, that creature has Disadvantage on all other attack rolls against you this turn.
11TH LEVEL: SUPERIOR HUNTER’S PREY
Once per turn when you deal damage to a creature marked by your Hunter's Mark, you can also deal that spell's extra damage to a different creature that you can see within 30 feet of the first creature.

15TH LEVEL: SUPERIOR HUNTER’S DEFENSE
When you take damage, you can take a Reaction to give yourself Resistance to that damage and any other damage of the same type until the end of the current turn.
---------------------------
Horizon Walker
Horizon walkers guard the world against threats that originate from other planes or that seek to ravage the mortal realm with otherworldly magic. They seek out planar portals and keep watch over them, venturing to the Inner Planes and the Outer Planes as needed to pursue their foes. These rangers are also friends to any forces in the multiverse – especially benevolent dragons, fey, and elementals – that work to preserve life and the order of the planes.

LEVEL 3: HORIZON WALKER MAGIC
You learn an additional spell when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown in the Horizon Walker Spells table. The spell counts as a ranger spell for you, but it doesn’t count against the number of ranger spells you know.

HORIZON WALKER SPELLS
Ranger Level	Spell
3rd	Protection from Evil and Good
5th	Misty Step
9th	Haste
13th	Banishment
17th	Teleportation Circle
LEVEL 3: DETECT PORTAL
You gain the ability to magically sense the presence of a planar portal. As an action, you detect the distance and direction to the closest planar portal within 1 mile of you. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a short or long rest.

LEVEL 3: PLANAR WARRIOR
You learn to draw on the energy of the multiverse to augment your attacks. As a bonus action, choose one creature you can see within 30 feet of you. The next time you hit that creature on this turn with a weapon attack, all damage dealt by the attack becomes force damage, and the creature takes an extra 1d8 force damage from the attack. When you reach 11th level in this class, the extra damage increases to 2d8.

LEVEL 7: ETHEREAL STEP
You learn to step through the Ethereal Plane. As a bonus action on your turn, you can cast the Etherealness spell with this feature, without expending a spell slot, but the spell ends at the end of the current turn. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a short or long rest.

LEVEL 11: DISTANT STRIKE
You gain the ability to pass between the planes in a blink of an eye. When you use the Attack action, you can teleport up to 10 feet before each attack to an unoccupied space you can see. If you attack at least two different creatures with the action, you can make one additional attack with it against a third creature.

LEVEL 15: SPECTRAL DEFENSE
Your ability to move between planes enables you to slip through the planar boundaries to lessen the harm done to you during battle. When you take damage from an attack, you can use your reaction to give yourself resistance to all of that attack's damage on this turn.
---------------------------
Monster Slayer
You have dedicated yourself to hunting down creatures of the night and wielders of grim magic. A monster slayer seeks out vampires, dragons, evil fey, fiends, and other magical threats. Trained in supernatural techniques to overcome such monsters, slayers are experts at unearthing and defeating mighty, mystical foes.

LEVEL 3: MONSTER SLAYER MAGIC
You learn an additional spell when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown in the Monster Slayer Spells table. The spell counts as a ranger spell for you, but it doesn't count against the number of ranger spells you know.

MONSTER SLAYER SPELLS
Ranger Level	Spell
3rd	Protection from Evil and Good
5th	Zone of Truth
9th	Magic Circle
13th	Banishment
17th	Hold Monster
LEVEL 3: HUNTER'S SENSE
You gain the ability to peer at a creature and magically discern how best to hurt it. As an action, choose one creature you can see within 60 feet of you. You immediately learn whether the creature has any damage immunities, resistances, or vulnerabilities and what they are. If the creature is hidden from divination magic, you sense that it has no damage immunities, resistances, or vulnerabilities. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 3: SLAYER'S PREY
You can focus your ire on one foe, increasing the harm you inflict on it. As a bonus action, you designate one creature you can see within 60 feet of you as the target of this feature. The first time each turn that you hit that target with a weapon attack, it takes an extra 1d6 damage from the weapon. This benefit lasts until you finish a short or long rest. It ends early if you designate a different creature.

LEVEL 7: SUPERNATURAL DEFENSE
You gain extra resilience against your prey’s assaults on your mind and body. Whenever the target of your Slayer’s Prey forces you to make a saving throw and whenever you make an ability check to escape that target's grapple, add 1d6 to your roll.

LEVEL 11: MAGIC-USERS NEMESIS
You gain the ability to thwart someone else's magic. When you see a creature casting a spell or teleporting within 60 feet of you, you can use your reaction to try to magically foil it. The creature must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC, or its spell or teleport fails and is wasted. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a short or long rest.

LEVEL 15: SLAYER'S COUNTER
You gain the ability to counterattack when your prey tries to sabotage you. If the target of your Slayer’s Prey forces you to make a saving throw, you can use your reaction to make one weapon attack against the quarry. You make this attack immediately before making the saving throw. If the attack hits, your save automatically succeeds, in addition to the attack’s normal effects.
---------------------------
Swarmkeeper
Feeling a deep connection to the environment around them, some rangers reach out through their magical connection to the world and bond with a swarm of nature spirits. The swarm becomes a potent force in battle, as well as helpful company for the ranger. Some Swarmkeepers are outcasts or hermits, keeping to themselves and their attendant swarms rather than dealing with the discomfort of others. Other Swarmkeepers enjoy building vibrant communities that work for the mutual benefit of all those they consider part of their swarm.

LEVEL 3: GATHERED SWARM
A swarm of intangible nature spirits has bonded itself to you and can assist you in battle. Until you die, the swarm remains in your space, crawling on you or flying and skittering around you within your space. You determine its appearance. Once on each of your turns, you can cause the swarm to assist you in one of the following ways, immediately after you hit a creature with an attack:

The attack's target takes 1d6 piercing damage from the swarm.
The attack's target must succeed on a Strength saving throw against your spell save DC or be moved by the swarm up to 15 feet horizontally in a direction of your choice.
You are moved by the swarm 5 feet horizontally in a direction of your choice.
LEVEL 3: SWARMKEEPER MAGIC
You learn the Mage Hand cantrip if you don't already know it. When you cast it, the hand takes the form of your swarming nature spirits. You also learn an additional spell of 1st level or higher when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown in the Swarmkeeper Spells table. Each spell counts as a ranger spell for you, but it doesn't count against the number of ranger spells you know.

SWARMKEEPER SPELLS
Ranger Level	Spell
3rd	Faerie Fire, Mage Hand
5th	Web
9th	Gaseous Form
13th	Arcane Eye
17th	Insect Plague
LEVEL 7: WRITHING TIDE
You can condense part of your swarm into a focused mass that lifts you up. As a bonus action, you gain a flying speed of 10 feet and can hover. This effect lasts for 1 minute or until you are incapacitated. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 11: MIGHTY SWARM
Your Gathered Swarm grows mightier in the following ways:

The damage of Gathered Swarm increases to 1d8.
If a creature fails its saving throw against being moved by the Gathered Swarm, you can also cause the swarm to knock the creature prone.
When you are moved by Gathered Swarm, it gives you half cover until the start of your next turn.
LEVEL 15: SWARMING DISPERSAL
You can discorporate into your swarm, avoiding danger. When you take damage, you can use your reaction to give yourself resistance to that damage. You vanish into your swarm and then teleport to an unoccupied space that you can see within 30 feet of you, where you reappear with the swarm. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
Drakewarden
Your connection to the natural world takes the form of a draconic spirit, which can manifest in physical form as a drake. As your powers grow, your drake grows as well, blossoming from a small four-legged companion to a majestic winged creature large and strong enough for you to ride. Along the way, you gain an increasing share of the awe-inspiring power of dragons. Consider the source of the draconic spirit you have bonded with. The Drakewarden Origin table offers examples.

DRAKEWARDEN ORIGIN
d6	Origin
1	You studied a dragon’s scale or claw, or a trinket from a dragon’s hoard, creating your bond through that token’s lingering draconic magic.
2	A secret order of rangers who collect and guard draconic lore taught you their ways.
3	A dragon gave you a geode or gemstone to care for. To your surprise, the drake hatched from that stone.
4	You ingested a few drops of dragon blood, forever infusing your nature magic with draconic power.
5	An ancient Draconic inscription on a standing stone empowered you when you read it aloud.
6	You had a vivid dream of a mysterious figure accompanied by seven yellow canaries, who warned you of impending doom. When you awoke, your drake was there, watching you.
LEVEL 3: Draconic Gift
The bond you share with your drake creates a connection to dragonkind, granting you understanding and empowering your presence. You gain the following benefits:

Thaumaturgy. You learn the Thaumaturgy cantrip, which is a ranger spell for you.
Tongue of Dragons. You learn to speak, read, and write Draconic or one other language of your choice.
LEVEL 3: Drake Companion
As an action, you can magically summon the drake that is bound to you. It appears in an unoccupied space of your choice within 30 feet of you. The drake is friendly to you and your companions, and it obeys your commands. See its game statistics in the accompanying Drake Companion stat block, which uses your proficiency bonus (PB) in several places. Whenever you summon the drake, choose a damage type listed in its Draconic Essence trait. You can determine the cosmetic characteristics of the drake, such as its color, its scale texture, or any visible effect of its Draconic Essence; your choice has no effect on its game statistics. In combat, the drake shares your initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It can move and use its reaction on its own, but the only action it takes on its turn is the Dodge action, unless you take a bonus action on your turn to command it to take another action. That action can be one in its stat block or some other action. If you are incapacitated, the drake can take any action of its choice, not just Dodge. The drake remains until it is reduced to 0 hit points, until you use this feature to summon the drake again, or until you die. Anything the drake was wearing or carrying is left behind when the drake vanishes. Once you summon the drake, you can’t do so again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend a spell slot of 1st level or higher to summon it.

LEVEL 7: Bond of Fang and Scale
The bond you share with your drake intensifies, protecting you and stoking the drake’s fury. When you summon your drake, it grows wings on its back and gains a flying speed equal to its walking speed. In addition, while your drake is summoned, you and the drake gain the following benefits:

Drake Mount. The drake grows to Medium size. Reflecting your special bond, you can use the drake as a mount if your size is Medium or smaller. While you are riding your drake, it can’t use the flying speed of this feature.
Magic Fang. The drake’s Bite attack deals an extra 1d6 damage of the type chosen for the drake’s Draconic Essence.
Resistance. You gain resistance to the damage type chosen for the drake’s Draconic Essence.
LEVEL 11: Drake’s Breath
As an action, you can exhale a 30-foot cone of damaging breath or cause your drake to exhale it. Choose acid, cold, fire, lightning, or poison damage (your choice doesn’t have to match your drake’s Draconic Essence). Each creature in the cone must make a Dexterity saving throw against your spell save DC, taking 8d6 damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. This damage increases to 10d6 when you reach 15th level in this class. Once you use this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend a spell slot of 3rd level or higher to use it again.

LEVEL 15: Perfected Bond
Your bond to your drake reaches the pinnacle of its power. While your drake is summoned, you and the drake gain the following benefits:

Empowered Bite. The drake’s Bite attack deals an extra 1d6 damage of the type chosen for its Draconic Essence (for a total of 2d6 extra damage).
Large Drake. The drake grows to Large size. When you ride your drake, it is no longer prohibited from using the flying speed of Bond of Fang and Scale.
Reflexive Resistance. When either you or the drake takes damage while you’re within 30 feet of each other, you can use your reaction to give yourself or the drake resistance to that instance of damage. You can use this reaction a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
=========================
ROGUE
Primary Ability: Dexterity

Rogues rely on cunning, stealth, and their foes’ vulnerabilities to get the upper hand in any situation. They have a knack for finding the solution to just about any problem, demonstrating a versatility that is the cornerstone of any successful adventuring party.

Rogues devote as much effort to mastering the use of a variety of skills as they do to perfecting their combat abilities, giving them broad capabilities that few other characters can match. Many Rogues focus on stealth and deception, while others refine skills that help them in a dungeon environment, such as climbing, finding and disarming traps, and opening locks.

When it comes to combat, Rogues prioritize subtle strikes over brute strength. A Rogue would rather make one precise strike than wear an opponent down with a barrage of blows. Rogues have an almost supernatural knack for avoiding danger, and a few learn magical tricks to supplement their other abilities.

Some Rogues began their careers as criminals, while others used their cunning to fight crime. Whatever a Rogue’s relation to the law, no common criminal or officer of the law can match the subtle brilliance of the greatest Rogues.

CREATING A ROGUE
To create a Rogue, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a 1st-level character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Rogue” section.

Then look at the Rogue table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. The descriptions of those features appear in the “Rogue Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d8 per Rogue level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Level after 1st: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Dexterity, Intelligence
Skills (Choose 4): Acrobatics, Athletics, Deception, Insight, Intimidation, Investigation, Perception, Persuasion, Sleight of Hand, Stealth
Weapons: Simple Weapons, Martial Weapons that have the Finesse Property
Tools: Thieves’ Tools
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a 1st-level character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 100 GP on equipment of your choice.

Arrows (x20)
Burglar’s Pack
Dagger (x2)
Leather Armor
Quiver
Shortbow
Shortsword
Thieves’ Tools
8 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE ROGUE
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Rogue as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Rogue’s primary ability, Dexterity, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you are already a Rogue.
Proficiencies Gained. If Rogue isn’t your initial class, here are the proficiencies you gain when you take your first Rogue level: Thieves’ Tools and one skill of your choice from the Rogue’s skill list.
Armor Training. When you gain your first Rogue level, you gain Light Armor training.
ROGUE CLASS FEATURES
As a Rogue, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Rogue table.



1ST LEVEL: EXPERTISE
You gain Expertise in two of your skill proficiencies of your choice. At Rogue level 6, you gain Expertise in two more of your skill proficiencies of your choice.

1ST LEVEL: SNEAK ATTACK
Once per turn, you can deal an extra 1d6 damage to one creature you hit with an attack roll if you have Advantage on the roll and the attack uses a Finesse or Ranged weapon. The extra damage's type is the same as the weapon's type. You don't need Advantage on the attack roll if at least one of your allies is within 5 feet of the target, the ally doesn’t have the Incapacitated condition, and you don’t have Disadvantage on the attack roll. The extra damage increases as you gain Rogue levels, as shown in the Sneak Attack column of the Rogue table.

1ST LEVEL: THIEVES’ CANT
You picked up various languages in the communities where you plied your roguish talents. You know Thieves’ Cant and one other language of your choice, which you choose from the Language tables.

1ST LEVEL: WEAPON MASTERY
Your training with weapons allows you to use the Mastery property of two kinds of weapons of your choice with which you have proficiency, such as Daggers and Shortbows. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change the kinds of weapons you chose. For example, you could switch to using the Mastery properties of Scimitars and Shortswords.

2ND LEVEL: CUNNING ACTION
Your quick thinking and agility allow you to move and act quickly. On your turn, you can take one of the following actions as a Bonus Action: Dash, Disengage or Hide.

3RD LEVEL: ROGUE SUBCLASS
You gain a Rogue subclass of your choice:

Arcane Trickster
Assassin
Soulknife
Thief
Swashbuckler (Playtest)
Inquisitor (Non-Playtest)
Mastermind (Non-Playtest)
Phantom (Non-Playtest)
Scout (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special abilities at certain Rogue levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Rogue level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

3RD LEVEL: STEADY AIM
As a Bonus Action, you give yourself Advantage on your next attack roll on the current turn. You can use this feature only if you haven’t moved during this turn, and after you use it, your Speed is 0 until the end of the current turn.

4TH LEVEL: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Rogue levels 8, 10, 12 and 16.

5TH LEVEL: CUNNING STRIKE
You have developed cunning ways to use your Sneak Attack. When you deal Sneak Attack damage, you can add one of the following Cunning Strike effects. Each effect has a die cost, which is the number of Sneak Attack damage dice you must forego to add the effect. You remove the die before rolling, and the effect occurs immediately after the attack’s damage is dealt. For example, if you add the Poison effect, remove 1d6 from the Sneak Attack’s damage before rolling. If a Cunning Strike effect requires a saving throw, the DC equals 8 + your Proficiency Bonus + your Dexterity modifier.

Poison (Cost: 1d6). You add a toxin to your strike, forcing the target to make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the target has the Poisoned condition for 1 minute. At the end of each of its turns, the Poisoned target can repeat the save, ending the effect on itself on a success. To use this effect, you must have a Poisoner’s Kit on your person.
Trip (Cost: 1d6). If the target is Large or smaller, it must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition.
Withdraw (Cost: 1d6). Immediately after the attack, you move up to half your Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks.
5TH LEVEL: UNCANNY DODGE
When an attacker that you can see hits you with an attack roll, you can use your Reaction to halve the attack’s damage against you (round down).

7TH LEVEL: EVASION
You can nimbly dodge out of the way of certain dangers. When you are subjected to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, you instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving throw and only half damage if you fail. You can’t use this feature if you have the Incapacitated condition.

7TH LEVEL: RELIABLE TALENT
Whenever you make an ability check that uses one of your skill or Tool Proficiencies, you can treat a d20 roll of 9 or lower as a 10.

11TH LEVEL: IMPROVED CUNNING STRIKE
You can use up to two Cunning Strike effects when you deal Sneak Attack damage, paying the die cost for each effect.

14TH LEVEL: DEVIOUS STRIKES
You have practiced new ways to use your Sneak Attack deviously. The following effects are now among your Cunning Strike options.

Daze (Cost: 2d6). The target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or on its next turn, it can do only one of the following: move or take an action or a Bonus Action.
Knock Out (Cost: 6d6). The target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw, or it has the Unconscious condition for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. The Unconscious target can repeat the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Obscure (Cost: 3d6). The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw, or it has the Blinded condition until the end of its next turn.
15TH LEVEL: SLIPPERY MIND
Your cunning mind is exceptionally difficult to control. You gain proficiency in Wisdom and Charisma saving throws.

18TH LEVEL: ELUSIVE
You are so evasive that attackers rarely gain the upper hand against you. No attack roll can have Advantage against you unless you have the Incapacitated condition.

19TH LEVEL: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Combat Prowess is recommended.

20TH LEVEL: STROKE OF LUCK
You have an marvelous knack for succeeding when you need to. If you fail a D20 Test, you can turn the roll into a 20. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Short Rest or a Long Rest.
---------------------------
ARCANE TRICKSTER
Some Rogues enhance their fine-honed skills of stealth and agility with Arcane spells, learning magical tricks to aid them in their trade. Some Arcane Tricksters use their talents as pickpockets and burglars, while others are pranksters, mischief-makers, or adventurers.

3RD LEVEL: SPELLCASTING
You have learned to cast spells. See the Player’s Handbook for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as an Arcane Trickster.

Cantrips. You know three cantrips: Mage Hand and two other cantrips of your choice from the Wizard spell list. Whenever you gain a Rogue level, you can replace one of your cantrips, except Mage Hand, with another Wizard cantrip of your choice. When you reach Rogue level 10, you learn another Wizard cantrip of your choice.
Spell Slots. The Arcane Trickster Spellcasting table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest.
Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare a list of spells of level 1+ that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose three level 1 Wizard spells. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Rogue levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Arcane Trickster Spellcasting table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional Wizard spells until the number of spells on your list matches the number in the Arcane Trickster Spellcasting table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Rogue level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Wizard spell for which you have spell slots.
Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for your Arcane Trickster spells.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for your Wizard spells.
the arcane trickster spell table

3RD LEVEL: MAGE HAND LEGERDEMAIN
When you cast Mage Hand, you can cast it as a Bonus Action, and you can make the spectral hand Invisible. You can control the hand as a Bonus Action, and through it, you can make Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) checks.

9TH LEVEL: MAGICAL AMBUSH
If you have the Invisible condition when you cast a spell on a creature, it has Disadvantage on any saving throw it makes against the spell on the same turn.

13TH LEVEL: VERSATILE TRICKSTER
You gain the ability to distract targets with your Mage Hand. When you use the Trip options of your Cunning Strike on a creature, you can also use that option on another creature within 5 feet of the spectral hand.

17TH LEVEL: SPELL THIEF
You gain the ability to magically steal the knowledge of how to cast a spell from another spellcaster. Immediately after a creature casts a spell that targets you or includes you in its area of effect, you can use your Reaction to force the creature to make an Intelligence saving throw. The DC equals your Spell Save DC. On a failed save, you negate the spell’s effect against you, and you steal the knowledge of the spell if it is at least level 1 and of a level you can cast (it doesn’t need to be a Wizard spell). For the next 8 hours, you have the spell prepared. The creature can’t cast it until the 8 hours have passed. Once you steal a spell with this feature, you can’t use this feature again until you finish a Long Rest.
---------------------------
ASSASSIN
An Assassin’s training focuses on the grim art of death, using stealth, poison, and disguise to eliminate foes with deadly efficiency. While some Rogues who follow this path are hired killers, spies, or bounty hunters, the capabilities of this subclass are equally useful for adventurers facing a variety of monstrous enemies.

3RD LEVEL: BONUS PROFICIENCIES
You gain a Disguise Kit and a Poisoner’s Kit and you have proficiency with them.

3RD LEVEL: ASSASSINATE
You are adept at ambushing a target, granting you the following benefits:

Initiative. You have Advantage on Initiative rolls.
Surprising Strikes. During the first round of each combat, you have Advantage on attack rolls against any creature that hasn’t taken a turn. If your Sneak Attack hits any target during that round, the target takes extra damage of the weapon’s type equal to your Rogue level.
9TH LEVEL: INFILTRATION EXPERTISE
You are expert at following techniques that aid your infiltrations:

Masterful Mimicry. You can also unerringly mimic another person’s speech, handwriting or both if you have spent at least one hour studying them.
Roving Aim. Your Speed isn't reduced to 0 by using Steady Aim.
13TH LEVEL: ENVENOM WEAPONS
When you use the Poison option of your Cunning Strike, the target also takes 2d6 Poison damage whenever it fails the saving throw. This damage ignores Resistance to Poison damage.

17TH LEVEL: DEATH STRIKE
When you hit with your Sneak Attack on the first round of a combat, the target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw (DC 8 + your Dexterity modifier + your Proficiency Bonus), or the attack’s damage is doubled against the target.
---------------------------
SOULKNIFE
Most assassins strike with physical weapons, and many burglars and spies use thieves' tools to infiltrate secure locations. In contrast, a Soulknife strikes and infiltrates with the mind, cutting through barriers both physical and psychic. These rogues discover psionic power within themselves and channel it to do their roguish work. They find easy employment as members of thieves' guilds, though they are often mistrusted by rogues who are leery of anyone using strange mind powers to conduct their business. Most governments would also be happy to employ a Soulknife as a spy. Amid the trees of ancient forests on the Material Plane and in the Feywild, some wood elves walk the path of the Soulknife, serving as silent, lethal guardians of their woods. In the endless war among the gith, a githzerai is encouraged to become a Soulknife when stealth is required against the githyanki foe. As a Soulknife, your psionic abilities might have haunted you since you were a child, only revealing their full potential as you experienced the stress of adventure. Or you might have sought out a reclusive order of psychic adepts and spent years learning how to manifest your power.

Level 3: Psionic Power
You harbor a wellspring of psionic energy within yourself. It is represented by your Psionic Energy Dice, which fuel certain psionic powers you have from this subclass. The Soulknife Energy Dice table shows the number of these dice you gave when you reach certain Rogue levels and the table shows the die size.

Soulknife Energy Dice table
Level	Number of Dice	Die Size
3	4	D6
5	6	D8
9	8	D8
13	10	D10
17	12	D12
Any features in this subclass that use a Psionic Energy Die use only dice from this subclass. Some of your powers expend the Psionic Energy Die, as specified in a power's description, and you can't use a power if it requires you to use a die when your Psionic Energy Dice are all expended. You regain one of your expended Psionic Energy Dice when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all of them when you finish a Long Rest.

The powers below use your Psionic Energy dice:

Psi-Bolstered Knack. If you fail an ability check using a skill or tool with which you have Proficiency, you can roll one Psionic Energy Die and add the number rolled to the check, potentially turning failure into success. The die is expend only if the roll succeeds.
Psychic Whispers. You can establish telepathic communication between yourself and others. As a Magic Action, choose one or more creatures you can see, up to a number of creatures equal to your Proficiency Bonus, and then roll one Psionic Energy Die. For a number of hours equal to the number rolled, the chosen creatures can speak telepathically with you, and you can speak telepathically with them. To send or receive a message (no action required), you and the other creature must be within 1 mile of each other. A creature can end the telepathic connection at any time (no action required).
The first time you use this power after each Long Rest, you don't expend the Psionic Energy Die. All other times you use the power, you expend the die.

Level 3: Psychic Blades
You can manifest shimmering blades of psychic energy. Whenever you take the Attack action or make an Opportunity Attack, you can manifest a psychic blade in your free hand and make the attack with that blade. This magic blade has the following traits:

Weapon Category: Simple Melee
Damage on Hit: 1d6 Psychic + the ability modifier used for the attack roll
Properties: Finesse, Thrown (range 60/120 feet)
Mastery: Vex (you can use this property and it doesn't count against the number of properties you can use with Weapon Mastery)
The blade vanishes immediately after it hits or misses its target, and it leaves no mark on its target if it deals damage. After you attack with the blade on your turn, you can make a melee or ranged weapon attack with a second psychic blade as a Bonus Action on the same turn if your other hand is free to create it. The damage die of this bonus attack is 1d4, instead of 1d6.

Level 9: Soul Blades
You can now use the following powers with your Psychic Blades:

Homing Strikes. If you make an attack roll with your Psychic Blades and miss the target, you can roll one Psionic Energy Die and add the number rolled to the attack roll. If this causes the attack to hit, the die is expended.
Psychic Teleportation. As a Bonus Action, you manifest a Psychic Blade, expend one Psionic Energy Die and roll it, and throw the blade at an unoccupied space you can see, up to a number of feet away equal to 10 times the number rolled. You then teleport to that space, and the blade vanishes.
Level 13: Psychic Veil
You can weave a veil of psychic static to mask yourself. As a Magic Action, you gain the Invisible condition for 1 hour or until you dismiss this effect (no action required). This invisibility ends early immediately after you deal damage to a creature or you force a creature to make a saving throw. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest, unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it.

Level 17: Rend Mind
You can sweep your Psychic Blade directly through a creature's mind. When you use your Psychic Blades to deal Sneak Attack damage to a creature, you can force that target to make a Wisdom saving throw (DC equal to 8 + your Proficiency Bonus + your Dexterity modifier). If the save fails, the target has the Stunned condition for 1 minute. The Stunned target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend three Psionic Energy Dice (no action required) to use it again.
---------------------------
THIEF
A mix of burglar, treasure hunter, and explorer, you are the consummate adventurer. In addition to improving your agility and stealthiness, you gain abilities useful for delving into ruins and getting maximum benefit from the magic items you find there.

3RD LEVEL: FAST HANDS
As a Bonus Action, you can do one of the following:

Sleight of Hand. Make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check to pick a lock or disarm a trap with Thieves’ Tools or to pick a pocket.
Use an Object. Take the Utilize action, or take the Magic Action to use a magic item that requires that action.
3RD LEVEL: SECOND-STORY WORK
You have trained to get into especially hard-to-reach places, granting you these benefits:

Climber. You gain a Climb Speed equal to your Speed.
Jumper. You can determine your jump distance using your Dexterity rather than your Strength.
9TH LEVEL: SUPREME SNEAK
You gain the following Cunning Strike option:

Stealth Attack (Cost: 1d6). If you have the Hide action’s Invisible condition, this attack doesn’t end that condition on you if you end the turn behind Three-Quarters Cover or Total Cover.

13TH LEVEL: USE MAGIC DEVICE
You've learned how to maximize use of magic items, granting you the following benefits:

Attunement. You can attune to up to four magic items at once.
Charges. Whenever you use a magic item property that expends charges, roll a d6. On a roll of 6, you use the property without expending the charges.
Scrolls. You can use any Spell Scroll, using Intelligence as your Spellcasting Ability for the spell. If the spell is a cantrip or a 1st-level spell, you can cast it reliably. If the scroll contains a higher-level spell, you must first succeed on an Intelligence (Arcana) check with a DC equal to 10 plus the spell’s level. On a successful check, you cast the spell from the scroll. On a failed check, the scroll disintegrates.
17TH LEVEL: THIEF’S REFLEXES
You are adept at laying ambushes and quickly escaping danger. You can take two turns during the first round of any combat. You take your first turn at your normal Initiative and your second turn at your Initiative minus 10.
---------------------------
Inquisitor
As an archetypal Inquisitive, you excel at rooting out secrets and unraveling mysteries. You rely on your sharp eye for detail, but also on your finely honed ability to read the words and deeds of other creatures to determine their true intent. You excel at defeating creatures that hide among and prey upon ordinary folk, and your mastery of lore and your sharp eye make you well equipped to expose and end hidden evils.

LEVEL 3: EAR FOR DECEIT
You develop a keen ear for picking out lies. Whenever you make a Wisdom (Insight) check to determine whether a creature is lying, treat a roll of 7 or lower on the d20 as an 8.

LEVEL 3: EYE FOR DETAIL
You can use a bonus action to make a Wisdom (Perception) check to spot a hidden creature or object or to make an Intelligence (Investigation) check to uncover or decipher clues.

LEVEL 3: INSIGHTFUL FIGHTING
You gain the ability to decipher an opponent’s tactics and develop a counter to them. As a bonus action, you make a Wisdom (Insight) check against a creature you can see that isn’t incapacitated, contested by the target’s Charisma (Deception) check. If you succeed, you can use your Sneak Attack against that target even if you don't have advantage on the attack roll, but not if you have disadvantage on it. This benefit lasts for 1 minute or until you successfully use this feature against a different target.

LEVEL 9: STEADY EYE
You gain advantage on any Wisdom (Perception) or Intelligence (Investigation) check if you move no more than half your speed on the same turn.

LEVEL 13: UNERRING EYE
Your senses are almost impossible to foil. As an action, you sense the presence of illusions, shapechangers not in their original form, and other magic designed to deceive the senses within 30 feet of you, provided you aren't blinded or deafened. You sense that an effect is attempting to trick you, but you gain no insight into what is hidden or into its true nature. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 17: EYE FOR WEAKNESS
You learn to exploit a creature’s weaknesses by carefully studying its tactics and movement. While your Insightful Fighting feature applies to a creature, your Sneak Attack damage against that creature increases by 3d6.
---------------------------
Mastermind
Your focus is on people and on the influence and secrets they have. Many spies, courtiers, and schemers follow this archetype, leading lives of intrigue. Words are your weapons as often as knives or poison, and secrets and favors are some of your favorite treasures.

LEVEL 3: MASTER OF INTRIGUE
You gain proficiency with the disguise kit, the forgery kit, and one gaming set of your choice. You also learn two languages of your choice. Additionally, you can unerringly mimic the speech patterns and accent of a creature that you hear speak for at least 1 minute, enabling you to pass yourself off as a native speaker of a particular land, provided that you know the language.

LEVEL 3: MASTER OF TACTICS
You can use the Help action as a bonus action. Additionally, when you use the Help action to aid an ally in attacking a creature, the target of that attack can be within 30 feet of you, rather than 5 feet of you, if the target can see or hear you.

LEVEL 9: INSIGHTFUL MANIPULATOR
If you spend at least 1 minute observing or interacting with another creature outside combat, you can learn certain information about its capabilities compared to your own. The DM tells you if the creature is your equal, superior, or inferior in regard to two of the following characteristics of your choice:

Intelligence score
Wisdom score
Charisma score
Class levels (if any)
At the DM's option, you might also realize you know a piece of the creature's history or one of its personality traits, if it has any.

LEVEL 13: MISDIRECTION
You can sometimes cause another creature to suffer an attack meant for you. When you are targeted by an attack while a creature within 5 feet of you is granting you cover against that attack, you can use your reaction to have the attack target that creature instead of you.

LEVEL 17: SOUL OF DECEIT
Your thoughts can't be read by telepathy or other means, unless you allow it. You can present false thoughts by making a Charisma (Deception) check contested by the mind reader's Wisdom (Insight) check. Additionally, no matter what you say, magic that would determine if you are telling the truth indicates you are being truthful if you so choose, and you can't be compelled to tell the truth by magic.
---------------------------
Phantom
Many rogues walk a fine line between life and death, risking their own lives and taking the lives of others. While adventuring on that line, some rogues discover a mystical connection to death itself. These rogues take knowledge from the dead and become immersed in negative energy, eventually becoming like ghosts. Thieves' guilds value them as highly effective information gatherers and spies. A Phantom can become a wizard's confidant and right hand. In temples of gods of death, the Phantom might work as an agent to track down those who try to cheat death and to recover knowledge that might otherwise be lost to the grave.

LEVEL 3: WHISPERS OF THE DEAD
Echoes of those who have died cling to you. Whenever you finish a short or long rest, you can gain one skill or tool proficiency of your choice, as a ghostly presence shares its knowledge with you. You lose this proficiency when you use this feature to choose a different proficiency that you lack.

LEVEL 3: WAILS FROM THE GRAVE
As you nudge someone closer to the grave, you can channel the power of death to harm someone else as well. Immediately after you deal your Sneak Attack damage to a creature on your turn, you can target a second creature that you can see within 30 feet of the first creature. Roll half the number of Sneak Attack dice for your level (round up), and the second creature takes necrotic damage equal to the roll’s total, as wails of the dead sound around them for a moment. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 9: TOKENS OF THE DEPARTED
When a life ends in your presence, you're able to snatch a token from the departing soul, a sliver of its life essence that takes physical form: as a reaction when a creature you can see dies within 30 feet of you, you can open your free hand and cause a Tiny trinket to appear there, a soul trinket. The DM determines the trinket's form or has you roll on the Trinkets table in the Player's Handbook to generate it. You can have a maximum number of soul trinkets equal to your proficiency bonus, and you can't create one while at your maximum. You can use soul trinkets in the following ways:

While a soul trinket is on your person, you have advantage on death saving throws and Constitution saving throws, for your vitality is enhanced by the life essence within the object.
When you deal Sneak Attack damage on your turn, you can destroy one of your soul trinkets that's on your person and then immediately use Wails from the Grave, without expending a use of that feature.
As an action, you can destroy one of your soul trinkets, no matter where it's located. When you do so, you can ask the spirit associated with the trinket one question. The spirit appears to you and answers in a language it knew in life. It's under no obligation to be truthful, and it answers as concisely as possible, eager to be free. The spirit knows only what it knew in life, as determined by the DM.
LEVEL 13: GHOST WALK
You can phase partially into the realm of the dead, becoming like a ghost. As a bonus action, you assume a spectral form. While in this form, you have a flying speed of 10 feet, you can hover, and attack rolls have disadvantage against you. You can also move through creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain, but you take 1d10 force damage if you end your turn inside a creature or an object. You stay in this form for 10 minutes or until you end it as a bonus action. To use this feature again, you must finish a long rest or destroy one of your soul trinkets as part of the bonus action you use to activate Ghost Walk.

LEVEL 17: DEATH KNELL
Your association with death has become so close that you gain the following benefits:

When you use your Wails from the Grave, you can now deal the necrotic damage to both the first and the second creature.
At the end of a long rest, a soul trinket appears in your hand if you don't have any soul trinkets, as the spirits of the dead are drawn to you.
---------------------------
Scout
You are skilled in stealth and surviving far from the streets of a city, allowing you to scout ahead of your companions during expeditions. Rogues who embrace this archetype are at home in the wilderness and among barbarians and rangers, and many Scouts serve as the eyes and ears of war bands. Ambusher, spy, bounty hunter – these are just a few of the roles that Scouts assume as they range the world.

LEVEL 3: SKIRMISHER
You are difficult to pin down during a fight. You can move up to half your speed as a reaction when an enemy ends its turn within 5 feet of you. This movement doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks.

LEVEL 3: SURVIVALIST
You gain proficiency in the Nature and Survival skills if you don't already have it. Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check you make that uses either of those proficiencies. (Expertise)

LEVEL 9: SUPERIOR MOBILITY
Your walking speed increases by 10 feet. If you have a climbing or swimming speed, this increase applies to that speed as well.

LEVEL 13: AMBUSH MASTER
You excel at leading ambushes and acting first in a fight. You have advantage on initiative rolls. In addition, the first creature you hit during the first round of a combat becomes easier for you and others to strike; attack rolls against that target have advantage until the start of your next turn.

LEVEL 17: SUDDEN STRIKE
You can strike with deadly speed. If you take the Attack action on your turn, you can make one additional attack as a bonus action. This attack can benefit from your Sneak Attack even if you have already used it this turn, but you can't use your Sneak Attack against the same target more than once in a turn.
---------------------------
SWASHBUCKLER
As a Swashbuckler, you focus on the art of the blade, bringing speed, elegance, and charm to your combat style—topped off with an exquisite flourish of panache. You excel in single combat, and your methods make a duel look like a flamboyant performance.

3RD LEVEL: FANCY FOOTWORK
You’ve learned how to land a strike and then slip away without reprisal. If you make a melee attack against a creature during your turn, that creature can’t make Opportunity Attacks against you for the rest of that turn.

3RD LEVEL: RAKISH AUDACITY
When you roll Initiative, you can give yourself a bonus to the roll equal to your Charisma modifier. You also gain an additional way to use your Sneak Attack; you don’t need Advantage on the attack roll to use your Sneak Attack against a creature if you are within 5 feet of it, no other creatures are within 5 feet of you, and you don’t have Disadvantage on the attack roll. All the other rules for Sneak Attack still apply to you.

9TH LEVEL: PANACHE
You have practiced new ways to use your Sneak Attack. The following effects are now among your Cunning Strike options.

Goad (Cost: 1d6). The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw, or until the end of its next turn, the target has Disadvantage on attack rolls against targets other than you and can’t make Opportunity Attacks against targets other than you.
Awe (Cost: 3d6). Each creature of your choice within 30 feet of you must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition until the end of your next turn.
13TH LEVEL: DASHING STRIKES
You have practiced new ways to use your Sneak Attack. The following effects are now among your Cunning Strike options.

Parrying Stance (Cost: 2d6). Roll a d6. Until the start of your next turn, you gain a bonus to your AC equal to the number rolled.
Invigorate (Cost: 2d6). Choose a creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. Until the end of that creature’s next turn, whenever it makes an attack roll or a saving throw, it can roll a d6 and add the number rolled to the attack roll or saving throw.
17TH LEVEL: MASTER DUELIST
Immediately after you use your Sneak Attack, you can make another attack against the same target, provided you are within 5 feet of it and no other creatures are within 5 feet of you.

=========================
SORCERER
Primary Ability: Charisma

Sorcerers wield innate magic that is stamped into their being. Some Sorcerers can’t name the origin of their power, while others trace it to strange events in their personal or family history. The touch of a dragon, the blessing of a dryad at a baby’s birth, or the strike of lightning from a clear sky might spark a Sorcerer’s gift. So too might the gift of a deity, exposure to the strange magic of another plane of existence, or a glimpse into the inner workings of reality. Whatever the origin, the result is an indelible mark on the mortal Sorcerer, a churning magic that can even be passed down through generations.

Sorcerers don’t learn magic; the raw, roiling chaos of magic is part of them. The essential art of a Sorcerer is learning to harness and channel that innate magic, allowing the Sorcerer to discover new and staggering ways to unleash their power. As Sorcerers master their innate magic, they grow more attuned to its origin, developing distinct powers that reflect the source of that magic.

Sorcerers are rare. Some family lines produce exactly one Sorcerer in every generation, but most of the time, the talents of sorcery appear as a fluke. People who have this magical power soon discover that the power doesn’t like to stay quiet. A Sorcerer’s magic wants to be wielded, and it tends to spill out in unpredictable ways if it isn’t.

CREATING A SORCERER
To create a Sorcerer, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a level 1 character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Sorcerer” sidebar.

Then look at the Sorcerer table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. Descriptions of those features appear in the “Sorcerer Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d6 per Sorcerer level
Hit Points at Level 1: 6 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Later Level: 1d6 (or 4) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Constitution, Charisma
Skills (Choose 2): Arcana, Deception, Insight, Intimidation, Persuasion, Religion
Weapons: Simple Weapons
Tools: None
ARMOR TRAINING
None

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a level 1 character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 50 GP on equipment of your choice.

Arcane Focus (Crystal)
Dagger (x2)
Dungeoneer’s Pack
Spear
28 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE SORCERER
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Sorcerer as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Sorcerer’s primary ability, Charisma, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you’re already a Sorcerer.
Spell Slots. Add all your Sorcerer levels to the appropriate levels from other classes to determine your available spell slots for casting spells, as detailed in the multiclassing rules. You prepare spells for each of your classes individually, referring to the rules of each class to determine the number of spells you prepare for it.
SORCERER CLASS FEATURES
As a Sorcerer, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Sorcerer table.



LEVEL 1: INNATE SORCERY
An event in your past left an indelible mark on you, infusing you with a simmering magic. As a Bonus Action, you can unleash that magic for 1 minute, during which you gain the following benefits:

The spell save DC of your Sorcerer spells increases by 1.
You have Advantage on the attack rolls of Sorcerer spells you cast.
You can use this feature twice, and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING
Drawing from your innate magic, you can cast spells. See the Player’s Handbook for rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as a Sorcerer.

Cantrips. You know four cantrips of your choice from the Sorcerer spell list. Rather than choosing, you may start with Light, Prestidigitation, Shocking Grasp, and Sorcerous Burst. Whenever you gain a Sorcerer level, you can replace one of your cantrips from this feature with another Sorcerer cantrip of your choice. When you reach levels 4 and 10 in this class, you learn another Sorcerer cantrip of your choice, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Sorcerer table.
Spell Slots. The Sorcerer table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your spells of level 1 and higher. To cast one of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of spells of level 1 and higher that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose two level 1 spells from the Sorcerer spell list. Rather than choosing, you may start with Burning Hands and Detect Magic. The number of spells on your list also increases as you gain Sorcerer levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Sorcerer table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Sorcerer spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a level 3 Sorcerer, your list of prepared spells can include six Sorcerer spells of level 1 or 2 in any combination. If another Sorcerer feature gives spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells on the list you prepare with this Spellcasting feature, but those spells otherwise follow the rules in this feature.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Sorcerer level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Sorcerer spell for which you have spell slots.
Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for the spells you cast with your Sorcerer features.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you cast with your Sorcerer features.
LEVEL 2: FONT OF MAGIC
You can tap into the wellspring of magic within yourself. This wellspring is represented by Sorcery Points, which allow you to create a variety of magical effects. You have 2 Sorcery Points, and you gain more as you reach higher levels, as shown in the Sorcery Points column of the Sorcerer table. You can never have more Sorcery Points than the number shown on the table for your level. You regain all spent Sorcery Points when you finish a Long Rest. You can use your Sorcery Points to fuel the options below, along with other features, such as Metamagic, that use those points.

Converting Spell Slots to Sorcery Points. You can expend a spell slot to gain a number of Sorcery Points equal to the slot’s level (no action required).
Creating Spell Slots. As a Bonus Action, you can transform unexpended Sorcery Points into one spell slot. The Creating Spell Slots table shows the cost of creating a spell slot of a given level, and it lists the minimum Sorcerer level you must be to create a slot. You can create a spell slot no higher in level than 5. Any spell slot you create with this feature vanishes when you finish a Long Rest.
CREATING SPELL SLOTS
Spell Slot Level	Sorcery Point Cost	Min. Sorcerer Level
1	2	2
2	3	3
3	5	5
4	6	7
5	7	9
LEVEL 2: METAMAGIC
You gain two Metamagic options of your choice from the Metamagic Options. You use the chosen options to temporarily modify spells you cast. To use an option, you must spend the number of Sorcery Points that it costs. You can use only one Metamagic option on a spell when you cast it, unless otherwise noted in one of those options. Whenever you gain a Sorcerer level, you can replace one of your Metamagic options with one you don’t know. You gain two more options at Sorcerer level 10 and two more at Sorcerer level 17.

LEVEL 3: SORCERER SUBCLASS
You gain a Sorcerer subclass of your choice:

Aberrant Sorcery
Clockwork Sorcery
Draconic Sorcery
Wild Magic Sorcery
Divine Soul Sorcery (Non-Playtest)
Shadow Sorcery (Non-Playtest)
Storm Sorcery (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special features at certain Sorcerer levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Sorcerer level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Sorcerer table, you gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16.

LEVEL 5: SORCEROUS RESTORATION
When you finish a Short Rest, you can regain expended Sorcery Points, but no more than a number equal to half your Sorcerer level (round down). Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 7: SORCERY INCARNATE
If you have no uses of Innate Sorcery left, you can use it if you spend 2 Sorcery Points when you take the Bonus Action to activate it. In addition, while your Innate Sorcery feature is active, you can use up to two of your Metamagic Options on each spell you cast.

LEVEL 19: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Fate is recommended.

LEVEL 20: ARCANE APOTHEOSIS
While your Innate Sorcery feature is active, you can use one Metamagic Option on each of your turns without expending Sorcery Points on it
---------------------------
Aberrant Sorcery
An alien influence has wrapped its tendrils around your mind, giving you psychic power. You can now touch other minds with that power and alter the world around you by using it to control the magical energy of the multiverse. Will this power shine from you as a hopeful beacon to others? Or will you be a source of terror to those who feel the stab of your mind and witness the strange manifestations of your might? As an Aberrant Mind sorcerer, you decide how you acquired your powers. Were you born with them? Or did an event later in life leave you shining with psychic awareness?

3RD LEVEL: PSYCHIC SPELLS
You learn additional spells when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown on the Psionic Spells table. Each of these spells counts as a sorcerer spell for you, but it doesn't count against the number of sorcerer spells you know.

Psionic Spells Table
Sorcerer Level	Spells
3rd	Arms of Hadar, Dissonant Whispers, Mind Sliver, Calm Emotions, Detect Thoughts
5th	Hunger of Hadar, Sending
7th	Evard's Black Tentacles, Summon Aberration
9th	Rary's Telepathic Bond, Telekinesis
3RD LEVEL: TELEPATHIC SPEECH
You can form a telepathic connection between your mind and the mind of another. As a Bonus Action, choose one creature you can see within 30 feet of you. You and the chosen creature can speak telepathically with each other while the two of you are within a number of miles of each other equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of 1 mile). To understand each other, you each must speak mentally in a language the other knows. The telepathic connection lasts for a number of minutes equal to your sorcerer level. It ends early if you use this ability to form a connection with a different creature.

6TH LEVEL: PSYCHIC SORCERY
When you cast any level 1+ spell or higher from your Psychic Spells feature, you can cast it by expending a spell slot as normal or by spending a number of Sorcery Points equal to the spell's level. If you cast the spell using sorcery points, it requires no verbal or somatic components, and it requires no material components, unless they are consumed by the spell or have a cost specified in it.

6TH LEVEL: PSYCHIC DEFENSES
You gain Resistance to Psychic damage, and you have Advantage on saving throws to avoid or end the Charmed or Frightened condition.

14TH LEVEL REVELATION IN FLESH
You can unleash the aberrant truth hidden within yourself. As a Bonus Action, you can spend 1 or more Sorcery Points to magically alter your body for 10 minutes. For each Sorcery Point you spend, you can gain one of the following benefits of your choice, the effects of which last until the alteration ends:

Aquatic Adaptation. You gain a Swimming Speed equal to twice your Speed, and you can breathe underwater. Gills grow from your neck or fan out from behind your ears, your fingers become webbed, or you grow writhing cilia.
Glistening Flight. You gain a Flying Speed equal to your Speed and can hover. As you fly, your skin glistens with mucus or otherworldly light.
See the Invisible. You can see any Invisible creature within 60 feet of yourself, provided it isn't behind Total Cover. Your eyes also turn black or become writhing sensory tendrils.
Wormlike Movement. Your body, along with any equipment you are wearing or carrying, becomes slimy and pliable. You can move through any space as narrow as 1 inch without squeezing, and you can spend 5 feet of movement to escape from non-magical restraints or the Grappled condition.
18TH LEVEL: WARPING IMPLOSION
You can unleash a space-warping anomaly. As a Magic Action, you teleport to an unoccupied space you can see within 120 feet of yourself. Immediately after you disappear, each creature within 30 feet of the space you left must make a Strength saving throw against your spell save DC. On a failed save, a creature takes 3d10 Force damage and is pulled straight toward the space you left, ending in an unoccupied space as close to your former space as possible. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage only. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest, unless you spend 5 Sorcery Points (no action required) to restore your use of it.
---------------------------
Clockwork Sorcery
The cosmic force of order has suffused you with magic. That power arises from Mechanus or a realm like it-a plane of existence shaped entirely by clockwork efficiency. You, or someone from your lineage, might have become entangled in the machinations of the modrons, the orderly beings who inhabit Mechanus. Perhaps your ancestor even took part in the Great Modron March. Whatever its origin within you, the power of order can seem strange to others, but for you, it is part of a vast and glorious system.

3RD LEVEL: CLOCKWORK MAGIC
You learn additional spells when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown on the Clockwork Spells table. Each spell counts as a sorcerer spell for you, but it doesn’t count against the number of sorcerer spells you know. These spells can’t be replaced when you gain a level in this class.

Clockwork Spells Table
Sorcerer Level	Spells
3rd	Alarm, Protection from Evil and Good, Aid, Lesser Restoration
5th	Dispel Magic, Protection from Energy
7th	Freedom of Movement, Summon Construct
9th	Greater Restoration, Wall of Force
3RD LEVEL: RESTORE BALANCE
Your connection to the plane of absolute order allows you to equalize chaotic moments. When a creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself is about to roll a d20 with Advantage or Disadvantage, you can use your Reaction to prevent the roll from being affected by Advantage and Disadvantage. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

6TH LEVEL: BASTION OF LAW
You can tap into the grand equation of existence to imbue a creature with a shimmering shield of order. As a Magic action, you can expend 1 to 5 Sorcery Points to create a magical ward around yourself or another creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. The ward is represented by a number of d8s equal to the number of Sorcery Points spent to create it. When the warded creature takes damage, it can expend a number of those dice, roll them, and reduce the damage taken by the total rolled on those dice. The ward lasts until you finish a Long Rest or until you use this feature again.

14TH LEVEL: TRANCE OF ORDER
You gain the ability to align your consciousness to the endless calculations of Mechanus. As a Bonus Action, you can enter this state for 1 minute. For the duration, attack rolls against you can't benefit from Advantage, and whenever you make a D20 Test, you can treat a roll of 9 or lower on the d20 as a 10. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest, unless you spend 5 Sorcery Points (no action required) to restore your use of it.

18TH LEVEL: CLOCKWORK CAVALCADE
You momentarily summon spirits of order to expunge disorder around you. As a Magic Action, you summon the spirits in a 30-foot Cube originating from you. The spirits look like modrons or other Constructs of your choice. The spirits are intangible and invulnerable, and they create the effects below within the cube before vanishing. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest, unless you spend 7 Sorcery Points (no action required) to restore your use of it.

Heal. The spirits restore up to 100 hit points, divided as you choose among any number of creatures of your choice in the Cube.
Repair. Any damaged objects entirely in the Cube are repaired instantly.
Dispel. Every spell of 6th level or lower ends on creatures and objects of your choice in the Cube.
---------------------------
DRACONIC SORCERY
Your innate magic comes from the gift of a dragon. Perhaps an ancient dragon facing death bequeathed some of its magical power to you or your ancestor. You might have absorbed magic from a site infused with dragons’ power, perhaps the location where a great dragon was slain. Or perhaps you handled a treasure taken from a dragon’s hoard, some precious item that was infused with draconic power. Or you might claim a dragon for an ancestor or wield draconic magic by virtue of your Dragonborn heritage.

LEVEL 3: DRAGON SPELLS
You learn additional spells when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown on the Dragonic Spells table. Each of these spells counts as a sorcerer spell for you, but it doesn't count against the number of sorcerer spells you know.

Sorcerer Level	Spells
3rd	Alter Self, Chromatic Orb, Command, Dragon's Breath
5th	Fear, Fly
7th	Arcane Eye, Charm Monster
9th	Legend Lore, Summon Dragon
LEVEL 3: DRACONIC RESILIENCE
The magic in your body manifests physical traits of your draconic gift. Your Hit Point maximum increases by 3 and increases by 1 whenever you gain another Sorcerer level. Parts of you are also covered by dragon-like scales. While you aren’t wearing armor, your base Armor Class equals 10 + your Dexterity modifier + your Charisma modifier.

LEVEL 6: ELEMENTAL AFFINITY
Your draconic magic has an affinity with one of the damage types associated with dragons. Choose one of those types: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Poison. You have Resistance to that damage type, and when you cast a spell that deals damage of that type, you can add your Charisma modifier to one damage roll of that spell.

LEVEL 14: DRAGON WINGS
As a Bonus Action, you can cause draconic wings to appear on your back. The wings last for 1 hour or until you dismiss them (no action required). For the duration you have a Fly Speed of 60 feet. When the wings manifest, you decide whether they’re spectral or physical. If physical, you mustn’t be wearing something that obstructs them. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you spend 3 Sorcery Points (no action required) to restore your use of it.

LEVEL 18: DRACONIC COMPANION
You can cast Summon Dragon without a Material component. You can also cast it once without a spell slot, and you regain the ability to cast it in this way when you finish a Long Rest. Whenever you start casting the spell, you can modify it so that it doesn't require Concentration. If you do so, the spell's duration becomes 1 minute for that casting.
---------------------------
WILD MAGIC SORCERY
Your innate magic stems from the forces of chaos that underlie the order of creation. You or an ancestor might have endured exposure to raw magic, perhaps through a planar portal leading to Limbo or the Elemental Planes. Perhaps you were blessed by a fey being or marked by a demon. Or your magic could be a fluke with no apparent cause. However it came to be, this magic churns within you, waiting for any outlet.

LEVEL 3: WILD MAGIC SURGE
Your spellcasting can unleash surges of untamed magic. Once per turn, you can roll a 1d20 immediately after you cast a Sorcerer spell with a spell slot. If you roll a 20, roll on the Wild Magic Surge table to create a magical effect. If the magical effect is a spell, it is too wild to be affected by your Metamagic.

LEVEL 3: TIDES OF CHAOS
You can manipulate chaos itself to gain Advantage on one D20 Test before you roll a d20. Once you do so, you must cast a Sorcerer spell with a spell slot or finish a Long Rest before you can use this feature again. If you do cast a Sorcerer spell with a spell slot before you finish a Long Rest, you automatically roll on the Wild Magic Surge table.

LEVEL 6: BEND LUCK
You have the ability to twist fate using your wild magic. Immediately after another creature you can see rolls the d20 for a D20 Test, you can take a Reaction and expend 1 Sorcery Point to roll 1d4 and apply the number rolled as a bonus or penalty (your choice) to the d20 roll.

LEVEL 14: CONTROLLED CHAOS
You gain a modicum of control over the surges of your wild magic. Whenever you roll on the Wild Magic Surge table, you can roll twice and use either number.

LEVEL 18: TAMED SURGE
Immediately after you cast a Sorcerer spell with a spell slot, you can create an effect of your choice from the Wild Magic Surge table instead of rolling on that table. You can choose any effect on the table except for the final row, and if the chosen effect involves a roll, you must make it. Once you use this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rests.
---------------------------
Divine Soul
Sometimes the spark of magic that fuels a sorcerer comes from a divine source that glimmers within the soul. Having such a blessed soul is a sign that your innate magic might come from a distant but powerful familial connection to a divine being. Perhaps your ancestor was an angel, transformed into a mortal and sent to fight in a god’s name. Or your birth might align with an ancient prophecy, marking you as a servant of the gods or a chosen vessel of divine magic.

A Divine Soul, with natural magnetism, is seen as a threat by some religious hierarchies. As an outsider who commands celestial power, these sorcerers can undermine the existing order by claiming a direct tie to the divine.

In some cultures, only those who can claim the power of a Divine Soul may command religious power. In these lands, ecclesiastical positions are dominated by a few bloodlines and preserved over generations.

LEVEL 3: DIVINE MAGIC
Your link to the divine allows you to learn spells normally associated with the cleric class. When your Spellcasting feature lets you learn a sorcerer cantrip or a sorcerer spell of 1st level or higher, you can choose the new spell from the cleric spell list or the sorcerer spell list. You must otherwise obey all the restrictions for selecting the spell, and it becomes a sorcerer spell for you. In addition, choose an affinity for the source of your divine power: good, evil, law, chaos, or neutrality. You learn an additional spell based on that affinity, as shown below. It is a sorcerer spell for you, but it doesn't count against your number of sorcerer spells known. If you later replace this spell, you must replace it with a spell from the cleric spell list.

Affinity	Spell
Good	Cure Wounds
Evil	Inflict Wounds
Lawful	Bless
Chaos	Bane
Neutrality	Prot' Good and Evil
LEVEL 3: FAVORED
Divine power guards your destiny. If you fail a saving throw or miss with an attack roll, you can roll 2d4 and add it to the total, possibly changing the outcome. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 6: EMPOWERED HEALING
The divine energy coursing through you can empower healing spells. Whenever you or an ally within 5 feet of you rolls dice to determine the number of hit points a spell restores, you can spend 1 sorcery point to reroll any number of those dice once, provided you aren't incapacitated. You can use this feature only once per turn.

LEVEL 14: ANGELIC FORM
You can use a bonus action to manifest a pair of spectral wings from your back. While the wings are present, you have a flying speed of 30 feet. The wings last until you're incapacitated, you die, or you dismiss them as a bonus action. The affinity you chose for your Divine Magic feature determines the appearance of the spectral wings: eagle wings for good or law, bat wings for evil or chaos, and dragonfly wings for neutrality.

LEVEL 18: UNEARTHLY RECOVERY
You gain the ability to overcome grievous injuries. As a bonus action when you have fewer than half of your hit points remaining, you can regain a number of hit points equal to half your hit point maximum. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
Shadow Sorcery
You are a creature of shadow, for your innate magic comes from the Shadowfell itself. You might trace your lineage to an entity from that place, or perhaps you were exposed to its fell energy and transformed by it. The power of shadow magic casts a strange pall over your physical presence. The spark of life that sustains you is muffled, as if it struggles to remain viable against the dark energy that imbues your soul. You have a quirk from your bloodline, you can pick from or roll one of the following:

You are always icy cold to the touch.
When you are asleep, you don't appear to breathe (though you must still breathe to survive).
You barely bleed, even when badly injured.
Your heart beats once per minute. This event sometimes surprises you.
You have trouble remembering that living creatures and corpses should be treated differently.
You blinked. Once. Last week.
3RD LEVEL: SHADOW MAGIC
You learn additional spells when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown on the Spells table. Each spell counts as a sorcerer spell for you, but it doesn’t count against the number of sorcerer spells you know. These spells can’t be replaced when you gain a level in this class. Whenever you gain a sorcerer level, you can replace one spell you gained from this feature with another spell of the same level. The new spell must be an abjuration or a transmutation spell from the sorcerer, warlock, or wizard spell list.

Shadow Sorcery Spells
Sorcerer Level	Spells
3rd	Cause Fear, Sleep, Darkness, Invisibility
5th	Fear, Summon Shadowspawn
7th	Greater Invisibility, Phantasmal Killer
9th	Mislead, Seeming
3RD LEVEL: EYES OF THE DARK
You have darkvision with a range of 120 feet, also you can cast the Darkness spell by spending 2 sorcery points or by expending a spell slot. If you cast it with sorcery points, you can see through the darkness created by the spell.

3RD LEVEL: STRENGTH OF THE GRAVE
Your existence in a twilight state between life and death makes you difficult to defeat. When damage reduces you to 0 hit points, you can make a Charisma saving throw (DC 5 + the damage taken). On a success, you instead drop to 1 hit point. You can't use this feature if you are reduced to 0 hit points by radiant damage or by a critical hit. After the saving throw succeeds, you can't use this feature again until you finish a long rest.

6TH LEVEL: HOUND OF ILL OMEN
You gain the ability to call forth a howling creature of darkness to harass your foes. As a bonus action, you can spend 3 sorcery points to summon a hound of ill omen to target one creature you can see within 120 feet of you. The hound uses the dire wolf’s statistics, with the following changes:

The hound is size Medium, not Large, and it counts as a monstrosity, not a beast.
It appears with a number of temporary hit points equal to half your sorcerer level.
It can move through other creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. The hound takes 5 force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
At the start of its turn, the hound automatically knows its target’s location. If the target was hidden, it is no longer hidden from the hound.
The hound appears in an unoccupied space of your choice within 30 feet of the target. Roll initiative for the hound. On its turn, it can move only toward its target by the most direct route, and it can use its action only to attack its target. The hound can make opportunity attacks, but only against its target. Additionally, while the hound is within 5 feet of the target, the target has disadvantage on saving throws against any spell you cast. The hound disappears if it is reduced to 0 hit points, if its target is reduced to 0 hit points, or after 5 minutes.

14TH LEVEL: SHADOW WALK
You gain the ability to step from one shadow into another. When you are in dim light or darkness, as a bonus action, you can teleport up to 120 feet to an unoccupied space you can see that is also in dim light or darkness.

18TH LEVEL: UMBRAL FORM
You can spend 6 sorcery points as a bonus action to transform yourself into a shadowy form. In this form, you have resistance to all damage except force and radiant damage, and you can move through other creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. You take 5 force damage if you end your turn inside an object.

You remain in this form for 1 minute. It ends early if you are incapacitated, if you die, or if you dismiss it as a bonus action.
---------------------------
Storm Sorcery
Your innate magic comes from the power of elemental air. Many with this power can trace their magic back to a near-death experience caused by the Great Rain, but perhaps you were born during a howling gale so powerful that folk still tell stories of it, or your lineage might include the influence of potent air creatures such as vaati or djinn. Whatever the case, the magic of the storm permeates your being. Storm sorcerers are invaluable members of a ship's crew. Their magic allows them to exert control over wind and weather in their immediate area. Their abilities also prove useful in repelling attacks by sahuagin, pirates, and other waterborne threats.

3RD LEVEL: STORM MAGIC
You learn additional spells when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown on the Storm Spells table. Each spell counts as a sorcerer spell for you, but it doesn’t count against the number of sorcerer spells you know. These spells can’t be replaced when you gain a level in this class.

Storm Sorcerer Spells
Sorcerer Level	Spells
3rd	Fog Cloud, Thunderwave, Gust of Wind, Levitate
5th	Call Lightning, Sleet Storm
7th	Ice Storm, Storm Sphere
9th	Cone of Cold, Control Winds
3RD LEVEL: WIND SPEAKER
The arcane magic you command is infused with elemental air. You can speak, read, and write Primordial. Knowing this language allows you to understand and be understood by those who speak its dialects: Aquan, Auran, Ignan, and Terran.

3RD LEVEL: TEMPESTUOUS MAGIC
You can use a bonus action on your turn to cause whirling gusts of elemental air to briefly surround you, immediately before or after you cast a spell of 1st level or higher. Doing so allows you to fly up to 10 feet without provoking opportunity attacks.

6TH LEVEL: HEART OF THE STORM
You gain resistance to lightning and thunder damage. In addition, whenever you start casting a spell of 1st level or higher that deals lightning or thunder damage, stormy magic erupts from you. This eruption causes creatures of your choice that you can see within 10 feet of you to take lightning or thunder damage (choose each time this ability activates) equal to half your sorcerer level.

6TH LEVEL: STORM GUIDE
You gain the ability to subtly control the weather around you.

If it is raining, you can use an action to cause the rain to stop falling in a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on you. You can end this effect as a bonus action.
If it is windy, you can use a bonus action each round to choose the direction that the wind blows in a 100-foot-radius sphere centered on you. The wind blows in that direction until the end of your next turn. This feature doesn't alter the speed of the wind.
14TH LEVEL: STORM'S FURY
When you are hit by a melee attack, you can use your reaction to deal lightning damage to the attacker. The damage equals your sorcerer level. The attacker must also make a Strength saving throw against your sorcerer spell save DC. On a failed save, the attacker is pushed in a straight line up to 20 feet away from you.

18TH LEVEL: WIND SOUL
You gain immunity to lightning and thunder damage. You also gain a magical flying speed of 60 feet. As an action, you can reduce your flying speed to 30 feet for 1 hour and choose a number of creatures within 30 feet of you equal to 3 + your Charisma modifier. The chosen creatures gain a magical flying speed of 30 feet for 1 hour. Once you reduce your flying speed in this way, you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest.
=========================
WARLOCK
Primary Ability: Charisma

Warlocks quest for knowledge that lies hidden in the fabric of the multiverse. They make pacts with mysterious beings of supernatural power, unlocking magical effects as they pry into the secrets and mysteries of reality. Drawing on the ancient knowledge of beings such as angels, archfey, demons, devils, hags, and alien entities of the Far Realm, Warlocks piece together arcane secrets to bolster their own power.

Warlocks are defined by pacts with otherworldly beings. Most Warlocks begin their search for magical power by delving into tomes of forbidden lore, dabbling in invocations meant to attract the power of extraplanar beings, or seeking out places of power where the influence of these beings can be felt. In no time, each Warlock is drawn into a binding pact with a powerful patron.

In contrast to Clerics, who are devout servants of the gods they serve, Warlocks view their patrons as resources, as means to the end of achieving magical power. Some Warlocks respect, revere, or even love their patrons; some serve their patrons grudgingly; and some seek to undermine their patrons even as they wield the power their patrons have given them. Once a pact is made, a Warlock’s thirst for knowledge and power can’t be slaked with mere study. No one makes a pact with extraplanar patrons without intending to use the power thus gained. Rather, most Warlocks spend their days in active pursuit of greater power and deeper knowledge, which typically means some kind of adventure.

CREATING A WARLOCK
To create a Warlock, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a level 1 character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Warlock” sidebar.

Then look at the Warlock table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. Descriptions of those features appear in the “Warlock Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d8 per Warlock level
Hit Points at Level 1: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Later Level: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills (Choose 2): Arcana, Deception, History, Intimidation, Investigation, Nature, Religion
Weapons: Simple Weapons
Tools: None
ARMOR TRAINING
Light Armor

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a level 1 character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 100 GP on equipment of your choice.

Arcane Focus (Orb)
Book (Occult Lore)
Dagger (x2)
Leather Armor
Scholar’s Pack
Sickle
15 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE WARLOCK
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Warlock as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Warlock’s primary ability, Charisma, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you’re already a Warlock.
Armor Training. When you gain your first Warlock level, you gain armor training with Light Armor.
Spell Slots. If you have both the Spellcasting feature and the Pact Magic feature from this class, you can use the spell slots you gain from Pact Magic to cast spells you have prepared from classes with the Spellcasting feature, and you can use the spell slots you gain from the Spellcasting feature to cast Warlock spells you have prepared.
WARLOCK CLASS FEATURES
As a Warlock, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Warlock table.



LEVEL 1: ELDRITCH INVOCATIONS
You have unearthed Eldritch Invocations, pieces of forbidden knowledge that imbue you with an abiding magical ability or other lessons. You gain one invocation of your choice, such as Devil's Sight. If an invocation has a prerequisite, you must meet it to learn that invocation. For example, if an invocation requires you to be a level 5+ Warlock, you can select the invocation once you reach Warlock level 5.

Whenever you gain a Warlock level, you can replace one of your invocations with another one for which you qualify. You can't replace an invocation if it's a prerequisite for another invocation that you have.

When you gain certain Warlock levels, you gain more invocations of your choice, as shown in the Invocations column of the Warlock table. You can’t pick the same invocation more than once unless an invocation’s description says otherwise.

LEVEL 1: PACT MAGIC
Through occult ceremony, you have formed a pact with a mysterious entity to gain magical powers. The entity is a voice in the shadows—its identity unclear—but its boon to you is concrete: the ability to cast spells. The information below details how you use the rules of spellcasting with Warlock spells, which appear in the Warlock spell list later in the class's description.

Cantrips. You know two Warlock cantrips of your choice. Eldritch Blast and Prestidigitation are recommended. Whenever you gain a Warlock level, you can replace one of your cantrips from this feature with another Warlock cantrip of your choice. When you reach Warlock levels 4 and 10, you learn another Warlock cantrip of your choice, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Warlock table.
Spell Slots. The Warlock table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your Warlock spells of levels 1–5. The table also shows the level of those slots, all of which are the same level. To cast one of those spells, you must expend a spell slot. You regain all expended Pact Magic spell slots when you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest. For example, when you’re a level 5 Warlock, you have two level 3 spell slots. To cast the level 1 spell Witch Bolt, you must spend one of those slots, and you cast it as a level 3 spell.
Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of spells of level 1 and higher that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose two level 1 spells from the Warlock spell list. Rather than choosing, you may start with Charm Person and Hex. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Warlock levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Warlock table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Warlock spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level no higher than what’s shown in the table’s Slot Level column for your level. When you reach level 6, for example, you learn a new Warlock spell, which can be of level 1–3. As you playtest this version of the Warlock, please use the Warlock spell list in the 2014 Player’s Handbook, with the following spells added: Bane (level 1 spell), Detect Magic (level 1 spell), and Speak with Animals (level 1 spell). If another Warlock feature gives spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells on the list you prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise follow the rules in this feature.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Warlock level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Warlock spell of an eligible level.
Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is the spellcasting ability for the spells you cast with your Warlock features.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you cast with your Warlock features.
LEVEL 2: MAGICAL CUNNING
You can perform an esoteric rite for 1 minute. At the end of it, you regain expended Pact Magic spell slots but no more than a number equal to half your maximum (round up). Once you use this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 3: WARLOCK SUBCLASS
You gain a Warlock subclass of your choice:

Archfey Patron
Celestial Patron
Fiend Patron
Great Old One Patron
Fathomless (Non-Playtest)
Genie (Non-Playtest)
Hexblade (Non-Playtest)
The Undead (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special features at certain Warlock levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your warlock level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one.

LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16, and 19.

LEVEL 9: CONTACT PATRON
In the past, you usually contacted your patron through intermediaries. Now you can communicate directly; you always have the Contact Other Plane spell prepared. With this feature, you can cast the spell without expending a spell slot to contact your patron, and you automatically succeed on the spell’s saving throw. Once you cast the spell with this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 11: MYSTIC ARCANUM
Your patron grants you a magical secret called an arcanum. Choose one level 6 spell from the Warlock spell list as this arcanum. You can cast your arcanum spell once without expending a spell slot, and you must finish a Long Rest before you can do so again. As shown on the Warlock table, you gain another Warlock spell of your choice that can be cast in this way when you reach levels 13 (level 7 spell), 15 (level 8 spell), and 17 (level 9 spell). You regain all uses of your Mystic Arcanum when you finish a Long Rest. Whenever you gain a Warlock level, you can replace one of your arcanum spells with another Warlock spell of the same level.

LEVEL 19: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Fate is recommended.

LEVEL 20: ELDRITCH MASTER
When you use your Magical Cunning feature, you regain all your expended Pact Magic spell slots.
---------------------------
ARCHFEY PATRON
Your pact draws on the power of the Feywild, the mysterious realm of the Fey. When you choose this subclass, you might make a deal with a single mighty archfey, such as the Prince of Frost; the Queen of Air and Darkness, ruler of the Gloaming Court; Titania of the Summer Court; Oberon, the Green Lord; Hyrsam, the Prince of Fools; or an ancient hag. Or you might call on a wide spectrum of Fey, forging a complex web of favors and debts. Your patron’s motivations are often inscrutable, and sometimes whimsical, and might involve a striving for greater magical power or the settling of age-old grudges.

LEVEL 3: PATRON SPELLS
The magic of your otherworldly patron ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Warlock level specified in the Archfey Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

ARCHFEY SPELLS
Warlock Level	Spells
3rd	Calm Emotions, Faerie Fire, Misty Step, Phantasmal Force, Sleep
5th	Blink, Plant Growth
7th	Dominate Beast, Greater Invisibility
9th	Dominate Person, Seeming
LEVEL 3: STEPS OF THE FEY
Your patron grants you the ability to move between the boundaries of the planes. You can cast Misty Step without expending a spell slot a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. In addition, whenever you cast that spell, you can choose one of the following additional effects.

Refreshing Step. Immediately after you teleport, you or one creature you can see within 10 feet of you gains 1d10 Temporary Hit Points.
Taunting Step. Creatures within 5 feet of the space you left must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC or have Disadvantage on attack rolls against creatures other than you until the start of your next turn.
LEVEL 6: MISTY ESCAPE
You can cast Misty Step as a Reaction in response to taking damage. In addition, the following effects are now among your Steps of the Fey options.

Disappearing Step. You have the Invisible condition until the start of your next turn or until immediately after you make an attack roll, deal damage or cast a spell.
Dreadful Step. Creatures within 5 feet of the space you left or the space you appear in (your choice) must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC or take 2d10 Psychic damage.
LEVEL 10: BEGUILING DEFENSES
Your patron teaches you how to guard your mind and body. You are immune to the Charmed condition. In addition, immediately after a creature you can see hits you with an attack roll, you can use your Reaction to reduce the damage you take by half (round down), and you can force the attacker to make a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC. On a failed save, the attacker takes Psychic damage equal to the damage you take. Once you use this Reaction, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a Pact Magic spell slot (no action required) to restore your use of it.

LEVEL 14: BEWITCHING MAGIC
Your patron grants you the ability to weave your magic with teleportation. Immediately after you cast an Enchantment or Illusion spell using an action and a spell slot, you can cast Misty Step as part of the same action and without expending a spell slot.
---------------------------
CELESTIAL PATRON
Your pact draws on the power of the Upper Planes, the realms of everlasting bliss. You might enter an agreement with an empyrean, a couatl, a sphinx, a unicorn, or some similar entity associated with those realms. Or you might call on numerous such beings as you pursue goals aligned with theirs. Your pact allows you to experience the barest touch of the holy light that illuminates the multiverse.

LEVEL 3: PATRON SPELLS
The magic of your otherworldly patron ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Warlock level specified in the Celestial Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

CELESTIAL SPELLS
Warlock Level	Spells
3rd	Aid, Cure Wounds, Guiding Bolt, Lesser Restoration, Light, Sacred Flame
5th	Daylight, Revivify
7th	Guardian of Faith, Wall of Fire
9th	Greater Restoration, Summon Celestial
LEVEL 3: HEALING LIGHT
You gain the ability to channel celestial energy to heal wounds. You have a pool of d6s that you spend to fuel this healing. The number of dice in the pool equals 1 plus your Warlock level. As a Bonus Action, you can heal yourself or one creature that you can see within 60 feet of yourself, expending dice from the pool. The maximum number of dice you can expend at once equals your Charisma modifier (minimum of one die). Roll the dice you expend, and restore a number of Hit Points equal to the roll’s total. Your pool regains all expended dice when you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 6: RADIANT SOUL
Your link to your patron allows you to serve as a conduit for radiant energy. You have Resistance to Radiant damage. Once per turn, when a spell you cast deals Radiant or Fire damage, you can add your Charisma modifier to that spell against one of the spell's targets.

LEVEL 10: CELESTIAL RESILIENCE
You gain Temporary Hit Points whenever you use your Magical Cunning feature or finish a Short Rest or Long Rest. These Temporary Hit Points equal your Warlock level plus your Charisma modifier. Additionally, choose up to five creatures you can see when you gain the points. Those creatures each gain Temporary Hit Points equal to half your Warlock level plus your Charisma modifier.

LEVEL 14: SEARING VENGEANCE
When you or an ally within 60 feet of you is about to make a Death Saving Throw, you can unleash radiant energy to save the creature. The creature regains Hit Points equal to half its Hit Point Maximum and can end the Prone condition on itself. Each creature of your choice that is within 30 feet of the creature takes Radiant damage equal to 2d8 plus your Charisma modifier, and each has the Blinded condition until the end of the current turn. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest.
---------------------------
FIEND PATRON
Your pact draws on the power of the Lower Planes—the homes of demons, devils, yugoloths, and other Fiends. When you choose this subclass, you might forge a bargain with a demon lord such as Demogorgon, Orcus, Fraz’Urb-luu, or Baphomet; an archdevil such as Asmodeus, Dispater, Mephistopheles, or Glasya; a pit fiend or balor that is especially mighty; or an ultroloth or some other lord of the yugoloths. Alternatively, you might call on a varied array of Fiends without binding yourself to the service of one. In any case, your patron’s aims are evil—the corruption or destruction of all things, ultimately including you—and your path will be defined by the extent to which you strive against those aims.

LEVEL 3: PATRON SPELLS
The magic of your otherworldly patron ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Warlock level specified in the Fiend Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

FIEND SPELLS
Warlock Level	Spells
3rd	Burning Hands, Command, Scorching Ray, Suggestion
5th	Fireball, Stinking Cloud
7th	Fire Shield, Wall of Fire
9th	Geas, Insect Plague
LEVEL 3: DARK ONE’S BLESSING
When you reduce an enemy to 0 Hit Points, you gain Temporary Hit Points equal to your Charisma modifier plus your Warlock level (minimum of 1 Temporary Hit Point). You also gain this benefit if someone else reduces an enemy within 10 feet of you to 0 Hit Points.

LEVEL 6: DARK ONE’S OWN LUCK
You can call on your fiendish patron to alter fate in your favor. When you make an ability check or a saving throw, you can use this feature to add a d10 to your roll. You can do so after seeing the initial roll but before any of the roll’s effects occur. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), but you can use it no more than once per roll. You regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 10: FIENDISH RESILIENCE
Choose one damage type, other than Force, whenever you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest. You gain Resistance to that damage type until you choose a different one with this feature.

LEVEL 14: HURL THROUGH HELL
Once per turn when you hit a creature with an attack roll, you can try to instantly transport the target through the Lower Planes. The target must succeed on a Charisma saving throw against your spell save DC, or the target disappears and hurtles through a nightmare landscape. The target takes 8d10 Psychic damage if it isn’t a Fiend, and it has the Incapacitated condition until the end of your next turn, when it returns to the space it previously occupied or the nearest unoccupied space. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a Pact Magic spell slot (no action required) to restore your use of it.
---------------------------
GREAT OLD ONE PATRON
Your pact is rooted in magic that is utterly foreign to the fabric of reality. When you choose this subclass, you might bind yourself to an ineffable being from the Far Realm or an elder god known only in legend—a being such as Ghaunadar, called That Which Lurks; Tharizdun, the Chained God; Dendar, the Night Serpent; Zargon, the Returner; Great Cthulhu; or some other unfathomable and uncaring being. Or you might rely on eldritch lore invoking the names of several such entities, without yoking yourself to one in particular. The motives of these beings are incomprehensible to mortals, and their knowledge is so immense and ancient that even the greatest libraries pale in comparison to the vast secrets they hold. The Great Old One might be indifferent to your existence, but the secrets you have learned nevertheless allow you to draw your magic from it.

LEVEL 3: PATRON SPELLS
The magic of your otherworldly patron ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Warlock level specified in the Great Old One Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

GREAT OLD ONE SPELLS
Warlock Level	Spells
3rd	Detect Thoughts, Dissonant Whispers, Phantasmal Force, Tasha's Hideous Laughter
5th	Clairvoyance, Hunger of Hadar
7th	Confusion, Summon Aberration
9th	Modify Memory, Telekinesis
LEVEL 3: AWAKENED MIND
You can form a telepathic connection between your mind and the mind of another. As a Bonus Action, choose one creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. You and the chosen creature can communicate telepathically with each other while the two of you are within a number of miles of each other equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of 1 mile). To understand each other, you each must speak mentally in a language the other knows. The telepathic connection lasts for a number of minutes equal to your Warlock level. It ends early if you use this feature to form a connection with a different creature.

LEVEL 3: PSYCHIC SPELLS
When you cast a Warlock spell that deals damage, you can change its damage type to Psychic. In addition, when you cast a Warlock spell that is an Enchantment or Illusion, you can do so without Verbal or Somatic components.

LEVEL 6: CLAIRVOYANT COMBATANT
When you form a telepathic bond with a creature using your Awakened Mind, you can force that creature to make a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC. On a failed save, the creature has Disadvantage on attack rolls against you, and you have Advantage on attack rolls against that creature for the duration of the bond. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest unless you expend a Pact Magic spell slot (no action required) to restore your use of it.

LEVEL 10: ELDRITCH HEX
Your alien patron grants you a powerful curse. You always have the Hex spell prepared. When you cast Hex and choose an ability, the target also has Disadvantage on saving throws of the chosen ability for the duration of the spell.

LEVEL 10: THOUGHT SHIELD
Your thoughts can’t be read by telepathy or other means unless you allow it. You also have Resistance to Psychic damage, and whenever a creature deals Psychic damage to you, that creature takes the same amount of damage that you take.

LEVEL 14: CREATE THRALL
When you cast Summon Aberration, you can modify it so that it doesn’t require Concentration. If you do so, the spell’s duration becomes 1 minute for that casting and when summoned, the Aberration has a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to your Warlock level plus your Charisma modifier. In addition, the first time each turn the Aberration hits a creature under the effect of your Hex, the Aberration deals extra Psychic damage to the target equal to the bonus damage of that spell.
---------------------------
Fathomless
You have plunged into a pact with the deeps. An entity of the ocean, the Elemental Plane of Water, or another otherworldly sea now allows you to draw on its thalassic power. Is it merely using you to learn about terrestrial realms, or does it want you to open cosmic floodgates and drown the world? Perhaps you were born into a generational cult that venerates the Fathomless and its spawn. Or you might have been shipwrecked and on the brink of drowning when your patron's grasp offered you a chance at life. Whatever the reason for your pact, the sea and its unknown depths call to you. Entities of the deep that might empower a warlock include krakens, ancient water elementals, godlike hallucinations dreamed into being by kuo-toa, merfolk demigods, and sea hag covens.

LEVEL 3: EXPANDED SPELL LIST
The Fathomless lets you choose from an expanded list of spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following spells are added to the warlock spell list for you.

Fathomless spells
Warlock level	Spells
3rd	Create or Destroy Water, Thunderwave, Gust of Wind, Silence
5th	Lightning Bolt, Sleet Storm
7th	Control Water, Summon Elemental
9th	Bigby's Hand (appears as a tentacle), Cone of Cold
LEVEL 3: TENTACLE OF THE DEEP
You can magically summon a spectral tentacle that strikes at your foes. As a bonus action, you create a 10-foot-long tentacle at a point you can see within 60 feet of you. The tentacle lasts for 1 minute or until you use this feature to create another tentacle. When you create the tentacle, you can make a melee spell attack against one creature within 10 feet of it. On a hit, the target takes 1d8 cold damage, and its speed is reduced by 10 feet until the start of your next turn. When you reach 10th level in this class, the damage increases to 2d8. As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the tentacle up to 30 feet and repeat the attack. You can summon the tentacle a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 3: GIFT OF THE SEA
You gain a swimming speed of 40 feet, and you can breathe underwater.

LEVEL 6: OCEANIC SOUL
You are now even more at home in the depths. You gain resistance to cold damage. In addition, when you are fully submerged, any creature that is also fully submerged can understand your speech, and you can understand theirs.

LEVEL 6: GUARDIAN COIL
Your Tentacle of the Deeps can defend you and others, interposing itself between them and harm. When you or a creature you can see takes damage while within 10 feet of the tentacle, you can use your reaction to choose one of those creatures and reduce the damage to that creature by 1d8. When you reach 10th level in this class, the damage reduced by the tentacle increases to 2d8.

LEVEL 10: GRASPING TENTACLES
You learn the spell Evard's Black Tentacles. It counts as a warlock spell for you, but it doesn't count against the number of spells you know. You can also cast it once without using a spell slot, and you regain the ability to do so when you finish a long rest. Whenever you cast this spell, your patron's magic bolsters you, granting you a number of temporary hit points equal to your warlock level. Moreover, damage can't break your concentration on this spell.

LEVEL 14: FATHOMLESS PLUNGE
You can magically open temporary conduits to watery destinations. As an action, you can teleport yourself and up to five other willing creatures that you can see within 30 feet of you. Amid a whirl of tentacles, you all vanish and then reappear up to 1 mile away in a body of water you've seen (pond size or larger) or within 30 feet of it, each of you appearing in an unoccupied space within 30 feet of the others. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a short or long rest.
---------------------------
Genie
You have made a pact with one of the rarest kinds of genie, a noble genie. Such entities rule vast fiefs on the Elemental Planes and have great influence over lesser genies and elemental creatures. Noble genies are varied in their motivations, but most are arrogant and wield power that rivals that of lesser deities. They delight in turning the table on mortals, who often bind genies into servitude, and readily enter into pacts that expand their reach. You choose your patron's kind or determine it randomly, from the following: Dao (Earth), Djinni (Air), Efreeti (Fire), Marid (Water).

LEVEL 3: EXPANDED SPELL LIST
The Genie lets you choose from an expanded list of spells when you learn a warlock spell. The Genie Expanded Spells table shows the genie spells that are added to the warlock spell list for you, along with the spells associated in the table with your patron's kind: dao, djinni, efreeti, or marid.

Genie Spells
Warlock Level	Genie Spells	Dao Spells	Djinni Spells	Efreeti Spells	Marid Spells
3rd	Detect Evil + Good, Phantasmal Force	Sanctuary, Spike Growth	Thunderwave, Gust of Wind	Burning Hands, Scorching Ray	Fog Cloud, Blur
5th	Create Food + Water	Meld in Stone	Wind Wall	Fireball	Sleet Storm
7th	Phantasmal Killer	Stone Shape	Greater Invisibility	Fire Shield	Control Water
9th	Creation	Wall of Stone	Seeming	Flame Strike	Cone of Cold
17th	Wish	-	-	-	-
LEVEL 3: GENIE'S VESSEL
Your patron gifts you a magical vessel that grants you a measure of the genie's power. The vessel is a Tiny object, and you can use it as a spellcasting focus for your warlock spells. You decide what the object is, or you can determine what it is randomly from the following: Oil lamp, Urn, Ring with a compartment, Stoppered bottle, Hollow statuette, Ornate lantern While you are touching the vessel, you can use it in the following ways:

Bottled Respite: As an action, you can magically vanish and enter your vessel, which remains in the space you left. The interior of the vessel is an extradimensional space in the shape of a 20-foot-radius cylinder, 20 feet high, and resembles your vessel. The interior is appointed with cushions and low tables and is a comfortable temperature. While inside, you can hear the area around your vessel as if you were in its space. You can remain inside the vessel up to a number of hours equal to twice your proficiency bonus. You exit the vessel early if you use a bonus action to leave, if you die, or if the vessel is destroyed. When you exit the vessel, you appear in the unoccupied space closest to it. Any objects left in the vessel remain there until carried out, and if the vessel is destroyed, every object stored there harmlessly appears in the unoccupied spaces closest to the vessel's former space. Once you enter the vessel, you can't enter again until you finish a long rest.
Genie’s Wrath: Once during each of your turns when you hit with an attack roll, you can deal extra damage to the target equal to your proficiency bonus. The type of this damage is determined by your patron: bludgeoning (dao), thunder (djinni), fire (efreeti), or cold (marid).
The vessel's AC equals your spell save DC. Its hit points equal your warlock level plus your proficiency bonus, and it is immune to poison and psychic damage. If the vessel is destroyed or you lose it, you can perform a 1-hour ceremony to receive a replacement from your patron. This ceremony can be performed during a short or long rest, and the previous vessel is destroyed if it still exists. The vessel vanishes in a flare of elemental power when you die.

LEVEL 6: ELEMENTAL GIFT
You begin to take on characteristics of your patron's kind. You now have resistance to a damage type determined by your patron's kind: bludgeoning (dao), thunder (djinni), fire (efreeti), or cold (marid). In addition, as a bonus action, you can give yourself a flying speed of 30 feet that lasts for 10 minutes, during which you can hover. You can use this bonus action a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 10: SANCTUARY VESSEL
When you enter your Genie's Vessel via the Bottled Respite feature, you can now choose up to five willing creatures that you can see within 30 feet of you, and the chosen creatures are drawn into the vessel with you. As a bonus action, you can eject any number of creatures from the vessel, and everyone is ejected if you leave or die or if the vessel is destroyed. In addition, anyone (including you) who remains within the vessel for at least 10 minutes gains the benefit of finishing a short rest, and anyone can add your proficiency bonus to the number of hit points they regain if they spend any Hit Dice as part of a short rest there.

LEVEL 14: LIMITED WISH
You entreat your patron to grant you a small wish. As an action, you can speak your desire to your Genie's Vessel, requesting the effect of one spell that is 6th level or lower and has a casting time of 1 action. The spell can be from any class's spell list, and you don't need to meet the requirements in that spell, including costly components: the spell simply takes effect as part of this action. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish 1d4 long rests.
---------------------------
Hexblade
You have made your pact with a mysterious entity from the Shadowfell – a force that manifests in sentient magic weapons carved from the stuff of shadow. The mighty sword Blackrazor is the most notable of these weapons, which have been spread across the multiverse over the ages. The shadowy force behind these weapons can offer power to warlocks who form pacts with it. Many hexblade warlocks create weapons that emulate those formed in the Shadowfell. Others forgo such arms, content to weave the dark magic of that plane into their spellcasting.

LEVEL 3: EXPANDED SPELL LIST
The Hexblade lets you choose from an expanded list of spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following spells are added to the warlock spell list for you.

Hexblade Spells
Warlock Level	Spells
3rd	Shield, Wrathful Smite, Blur, Branding Smite
5th	Blink, Elemental Weapon
7th	Phantasmal Killer, Staggering Smite
9th	Banishing Smite, Cone of Cold
LEVEL 3: HEXBLADE'S CURSE
You gain the ability to place a baleful curse on someone. As a bonus action, choose one creature you can see within 30 feet of you. The target is cursed for 1 minute. The curse ends early if the target dies, you die, or you are incapacitated. Until the curse ends, you gain the following benefits:

You gain a bonus to damage rolls against the cursed target. The bonus equals your proficiency bonus.
Any attack roll you make against the cursed target is a critical hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20.
If the cursed target dies, you regain hit points equal to your warlock level + your Charisma modifier (minimum of 1 hit point).
You can’t use this feature again until you finish a short or long rest.

LEVEL 3: HEX WARRIOR
You acquire the training necessary to effectively arm yourself for battle. You gain proficiency with medium armor, shields, and martial weapons. The influence of your patron also allows you to mystically channel your will through a particular weapon. Whenever you finish a long rest, you can touch one weapon that you are proficient with and that lacks the two-handed property. When you attack with that weapon, you can use your Charisma modifier, instead of Strength or Dexterity, for the attack and damage rolls. This benefit lasts until you finish a long rest. If you later gain the Pact of the Blade feature, this benefit extends to every pact weapon you conjure with that feature, no matter the weapon's type.

LEVEL 6: ACCURSED SPECTER
You can curse the soul of a person you slay, temporarily binding it in your service. When you slay a humanoid, you can cause its spirit to rise from its corpse as a specter. When the specter appears, it gains temporary hit points equal to half your warlock level. Roll initiative for the specter, which has its own turns. It obeys your verbal commands, and it gains a special bonus to its attack rolls equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of +0). The specter remains in your service until the end of your next long rest, at which point it vanishes to the afterlife. Once you bind a specter with this feature, you can't use the feature again until you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 10: ARMOUR OF HEXES
Your hex grows more powerful. If the target cursed by your Hexblade’s Curse hits you with an attack roll, you can use your reaction to roll a d6. On a 4 or higher, the attack instead misses you, regardless of its roll.

LEVEL 14: MASTER OF HEXES
You can spread your Hexblade's Curse from a slain creature to another creature. When the creature cursed by your Hexblade's Curse dies, you can apply the curse to a different creature you can see within 30 feet of you, provided you aren't incapacitated. When you apply the curse in this way, you don't regain hit points from the death of the previously cursed creature.
=========================
WIZARD
Primary Ability: Intelligence

Wizards are supreme magic-users, defined by their careful and exhaustive study of magic’s inner workings. Drawing on the subtle weave of magic that permeates the cosmos, Wizards cast spells of explosive fire, arcing lightning, subtle deception, and spectacular transformations. Their magic conjures monsters from other planes of existence, glimpses the future, or turns slain foes into zombies. Their mightiest spells change one substance into another, call meteors from the sky, or open portals to other worlds.

Beyond the sheer power of the spells they cast, though, Wizards share an approach to magic that is scholarly and exacting. Wizards understand magic at a fundamental level, giving them a precise mastery of their spells. They examine the theoretical underpinnings of magic, particularly the categorization of spells into schools of magic, and use those foundations to alter their spells and even craft entirely new spells. Renowned Wizards such as Bigby, Tasha, Mordenkainen, Yolande, and many more invented iconic spells now used across the multiverse. Wizards’ lives are seldom mundane. The closest a Wizard is likely to come to an ordinary life is working as a sage or lecturer in a library or university, teaching others the secrets of the multiverse. Other Wizards sell their services as diviners, serve in military forces, or pursue lives of crime or domination.

But the lure of knowledge and power calls even the most unadventurous Wizards from the safety of their libraries and laboratories and into crumbling ruins and lost cities. Most Wizards believe that their counterparts in ancient civilizations knew secrets of magic that have been lost to the ages, and discovering those secrets could unlock the path to a power greater than any magic available in the present age.

CREATING A WIZARD
To create a Wizard, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a level 1 character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Wizard” sidebar.

Then look at the Wizard table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. Descriptions of those features appear in the “Wizard Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d6 per Wizard level
Hit Points at Level 1: 6 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points per Later Level: 1d6 (or 4) + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Intelligence, Wisdom
Skills (Choose 2): Arcana, History, Insight, Investigation, Medicine, Religion
Weapons: Simple Weapons
Tools: None
ARMOR TRAINING
None

STARTING EQUIPMENT
As a level 1 character, you start with the following equipment, or you can forgo it and spend 55 GP on equipment of your choice.

Arcane Focus
(Quarterstaff)
Dagger (x2)
Robe
Scholar’s Pack
5 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE WIZARD
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Wizard as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Wizard’s primary ability, Intelligence, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you’re already a Wizard.
Spell Slots. Add all your Wizard levels to the appropriate levels from other classes to determine your available spell slots for casting spells, as detailed in the multiclassing rules. You prepare spells for each of your classes individually, referring to the rules of each class to determine the number of spells you prepare for it.
WIZARD CLASS FEATURES
As a Wizard, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Wizard table.



LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING
As a student of arcane magic, you have learned to cast spells. See the Player’s Handbook for rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as a Wizard.

Cantrips. You know three cantrips of your choice from the Wizard spell list. Light, Mage Hand and Ray of Frost are recommended. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one of your cantrips from this feature with another Wizard cantrip of your choice. When you reach levels 4 and 10 in this class, you learn another Wizard cantrip of your choice, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Wizard table.
Spellbook. Your wizardly apprenticeship culminated in the creation of a unique book in your possession: your spellbook. It is a Tiny object that weighs 3 pounds, and it contains 100 pages, which can be read only by you or someone casting Identify. You determine the book’s appearance and materials, such as a gilt-edged tome or a collection of vellum bound together by twine. The book contains the spells you know of level 1 and higher. It starts with six level 1 spells of your choice from the Wizard spell list. Detect Magic, Feather Fall, Mage Armor, Magic Missile, Sleep and Thunderwave are recommended. Whenever you gain a Wizard level after 1, add two Wizard spells of your choice to your spellbook. Each of these spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots, as shown on the Wizard table. The spells are the culmination of arcane research you do regularly.
Spell Slots. The Wizard table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your spells of level 1 and higher. To cast one of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest.
Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To do so, choose four spells from your spellbook. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Wizard levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Wizard table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Wizard spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a level 3 Wizard, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination, chosen from your spellbook. If another Wizard feature gives spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells you can prepare with this Spellcasting feature, but those spells otherwise follow the rules in this feature.
Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your list of prepared spells, replacing one or more of the spells there. Preparing a new list requires time spent studying your spellbook and memorizing the incantations and gestures you must make to cast a spell: at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell you add to the list.
Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for the spells you cast with your Wizard features.
Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus or your spellbook as a Spellcasting Focus for the spells you cast with your Wizard features.
EXPANDING AND REPLACING YOUR SPELLBOOK
The spells that you add to your spellbook as you gain levels reflect the magical research you conduct on your own, but you might find other spells during your adventures that you can add to your book. You could discover a spell on a Spell Scroll or in an ancient tome, for example, and then copy the spell into your spellbook, using the process below.

Copying a Spell into the Book. When you find a Wizard spell of level 1 or higher, you can copy it into your spellbook if it is of a spell level you can prepare and if you can spare the time to copy it. For each level of the spell, the transcription process takes 2 hours and costs 50 GP. The cost represents the fine inks you use as well as Material components you expend as you experiment with the spell to master it. Once you have spent this time and money, you can prepare the spell just like the other spells in your spellbook.
Replacing the Book. You can copy a spell from your own spellbook into another book—for example, if you want to make a backup copy of your spellbook. This is just like copying a new spell into your spellbook but faster and easier, since you already know how to cast the spell. You need spend only 1 hour and 10 GP for each level of the copied spell. If you lose your spellbook, you can use the same procedure to transcribe the Wizard spells that you have prepared into a new spellbook. Filling out the remainder of your spellbook requires you to find new spells to do so, as normal. For this reason, many wizards keep a backup spellbook.
LEVEL 1: RITUAL ADEPT
You can cast any spell as a Ritual if that spell has the Ritual tag and the spell is in your spellbook. You needn’t have the spell prepared, but you must read from the book to cast a spell in this way.

LEVEL 1: ARCANE RECOVERY
You can regain some of your magical energy by studying your spellbook. When you finish a Short Rest, you can choose expended spell slots to recover. The spell slots can have a combined level that is equal to or less than half your Wizard level (rounded up), and none of the slots can be level 6 or higher. For example, if you’re a level 4 Wizard, you can recover up to two levels worth of spell slots, regaining either a level 2 spell slot or two level 1 spell slots. Once you use this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 2: SCHOLAR
While studying magic, you also specialized in an academic field of study. Choose one of the following skills in which you have proficiency: Arcana, History, Investigation, Medicine, Nature or Religion. You have Expertise in the chosen skill.

LEVEL 3: WIZARD SUBCLASS
You gain a Wizard subclass of your choice:

Abjurer
Diviner
Evoker
Illusionist
Bladesinger (Non-Playtest)
Order of Scribes (Non-Playtest)
War Magic (Non-Playtest)
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special features at certain Wizard levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Wizard level and lower. There are non-playtest subclasses that can be used, please check with your DM before using one

LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Wizard table, you gain this feature again at levels 8, 12 and 16.

LEVEL 5: MEMORIZE SPELL
Whenever you finish a Short Rest, you can study your spellbook and replace one of the level 1+ Wizard spells you have prepared for your Spellcasting feature with another level 1+ spell from the book.

LEVEL 18: SPELL MASTERY
You have achieved such mastery over certain spells that you can cast them at will. Choose a level 1 and a level 2 spell that are in your spellbook and that have a casting time of an action. You always have those spells prepared, and you can cast them at their lowest level without expending a spell slot. If you want to cast either spell at a higher level, you must expend a spell slot. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can study your spellbook and replace one of those spells for another eligible spell of the same level from the book.

LEVEL 19: EPIC BOON
You gain an Epic Boon feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Fate is recommended.

LEVEL 20: SIGNATURE SPELLS
Choose two level 3 spells in your spellbook as your signature spells. You always have these spells prepared, and you can cast each of them once at level 3 without expending a spell slot. When you do so, you can’t do so again until you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest. To cast either spell at a higher level, you must expend a spell slot.
---------------------------
ABJURER
Your study of magic is focused on spells that block, banish, or protect—ending harmful effects, banishing evil influences, and protecting the weak. Abjurers are sought when baleful spirits require exorcism, when important locations must be guarded against magical spying, and when portals to other planes of existence must be closed. Adventuring parties value Abjurers for the protection they provide their companions against a variety of hostile magic and other attacks.

LEVEL 3: ABJURATION SAVANT
Choose two Wizard spells from the Abjuration school, each of which must be no higher than level 2, and add them to your spellbook for free. In addition, whenever you gain access to a new level of spell slots in this class, you can add one Wizard spell from the Abjuration school to your spellbook for free. The chosen spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots.

LEVEL 3: ARCANE WARD
You can weave magic around yourself for protection. When you cast an Abjuration spell with a spell slot, you can simultaneously use a strand of the spell’s magic to create a magical ward on yourself that lasts until you finish a Long Rest. The ward has a Hit Point maximum equal to twice your Wizard level plus your Intelligence modifier. Whenever you take damage, the ward takes the damage instead and if you have any Resistances or Vulnerabilities, apply them before reducing the ward's Hit Points. If this damage reduces the ward to 0 Hit Points, you take any remaining damage. While the ward has 0 Hit Points, it can’t absorb damage, but its magic remains.

Whenever you cast an Abjuration spell with a spell slot, the ward regains a number of Hit Points equal to twice the level of the spell slot. Alternatively, as a Bonus Action, you can expend a spell slot, and the ward regains a number of Hit Points equal to twice the level of the spell slot expended. Once you create the ward, you can’t create it again until you finish a Long Rest.

LEVEL 6: PROJECTED WARD
When a creature that you can see within 30 feet of yourself takes damage, you can use your Reaction to cause your Arcane Ward to absorb that damage. If this damage reduces the ward to 0 Hit Points, the warded creature takes any remaining damage. If that creature has any Resistances or Vulnerabilities, apply them before reducing the ward's Hit Points.

LEVEL 10: SPELL BREAKER
You always have the Counter Spell and Dispel Magic spell prepared. In addition, you can cast Dispel Magic as a Bonus Action, and you can add your Proficiency Bonus to its ability check. When you cast either spell with a spell slot, that slot isn't expended if the spell fails to stop a spell.

LEVEL 14: SPELL RESISTANCE
You have Advantage on saving throws against spells, and you have Resistance against the damage of spells.
---------------------------
DIVINER
The counsel of a Diviner is sought by those who seek a clearer understanding of the past, present, and future. As a Diviner, you strive to part the veils of space, time, and consciousness so you can see clearly. You work to master spells of discernment, remote viewing, supernatural knowledge, and foresight.

LEVEL 3: DIVINATION SAVANT
Choose two Wizard spells from the Divination school, each of which must be no higher than level 2, and add them to your spellbook for free. In addition, whenever you gain access to a new level of spell slots in this class, you can add one Wizard spell from the Divination school to your spellbook for free. The chosen spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots.

LEVEL 3: PORTENT
Glimpses of the future begin to press in on your awareness. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, roll two d20s and record the numbers rolled. You can replace any D20 Test made by you or a creature that you can see with one of these foretelling rolls. You must choose to do so before the roll, and you can replace a roll in this way only once per turn. Each foretelling roll can be used only once. When you finish a Long Rest, you lose any unused foretelling rolls.

LEVEL 6: EXPERT DIVINATION
Casting Divination spells comes so easily to you that it expends only a fraction of your spellcasting efforts. When you cast a Divination spell using a level 2+ spell slot, you regain one expended spell slot. The slot you regain must be of a level lower than the slot you expended and can’t be higher than level 5.

LEVEL 10: THE THIRD EYE
You can increase your powers of perception. As a Bonus Action, choose one of the following benefits, which lasts until you start a Short Rest or Long Rest. You can’t use this feature again until you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest.

Darkvision. You gain Darkvision out to a range of 120 feet.
Greater Comprehension. You can read any language.
See Invisibility. You can cast See Invisibility without expending a spell slot.
LEVEL 14: GREATER PORTENT
The visions in your dreams intensify and paint a more accurate picture in your mind of what is to come. Roll three d20s for your Portent feature rather than two.
---------------------------
EVOKER
You focus your study on magic that creates powerful elemental effects such as bitter cold, searing flame, rolling thunder, crackling lightning, and burning acid. Some Evokers find employment in military forces, serving as artillery to blast enemy armies from afar. Others use their spectacular power to protect the weak, while some seek their own gain as adventurers.

LEVEL 3: EVOCATION SAVANT
Choose two Wizard spells from the Evocation school, each of which must be no higher than level 2, and add them to your spellbook for free. In addition, whenever you gain access to a new level of spell slots in this class, you can add one Wizard spell from the Evocation school to your spellbook for free. The chosen spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots.

LEVEL 3: POTENT CANTRIP
Your damaging cantrips affect even creatures that avoid the brunt of the effect. When you cast a cantrip at a creature and you miss with the attack roll or the target succeeds on a saving throw against the cantrip, the target takes half the cantrip’s damage (if any) but suffers no additional effect from the cantrip.

LEVEL 6: SCULPT SPELLS
You can create pockets of relative safety within the effects of your evocations. When you cast an Evocation spell that affects other creatures that you can see, you can choose a number of them equal to 1 + the spell’s level. The chosen creatures automatically succeed on their saving throws against the spell, and they take no damage if they would normally take half damage on a successful save.

LEVEL 10: EMPOWERED EVOCATION
Whenever you cast a Wizard spell from the Evocation school, you can add your Intelligence modifier to one damage roll of that spell.

LEVEL 14: OVERCHANNEL
You can increase the power of your spells. When you cast a Wizard spell with a spell slot of levels 1–5 that deals damage, you can deal maximum damage with that spell on the turn you cast it. The first time you do so, you suffer no adverse effect. If you use this feature again before you finish a Long Rest, you take 2d12 Necrotic damage for each level of the spell slot immediately after you cast it. This damage ignores Resistance and Immunity. Each time you use this feature again before finishing a Long Rest, the Necrotic damage per spell level increases by 1d12.
---------------------------
ILLUSIONIST
You focus your study on magic that dazzles the senses and tricks the mind. Your magic is subtle, but the illusions you craft make the impossible seem real. Some Illusionists—including many Gnome Wizards—are benign tricksters who use their spells to entertain. Others are more sinister masters of deception, using their illusions to frighten and fool others for their personal gain.

LEVEL 3: ILLUSION SAVANT
Choose two Wizard spells from the Illusion school, each of which must be no higher than level 2, and add them to your spellbook for free. In addition, whenever you gain access to a new level of spell slots in this class, you can add one Wizard spell from the Illusion school to your spellbook for free. The chosen spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots.

LEVEL 3: IMPROVED ILLUSIONS
You can cast Illusion spells without providing Verbal components and if an Illusion spell you cast has a range of 10+ feet, the range increases by 60 feet.

You also know the Minor Illusion cantrip. If you already know it, you learn a different Wizard cantrip of your choice. The cantrip doesn’t count against your number of cantrips known. You can create both a sound and an image with a single casting of Minor Illusion and you can cast it as a Bonus Action.

LEVEL 6: PHANTASMAL CREATURES
You always have the Summon Beast and Summon Fey spells prepared. Whenever you cast either spell, you can change its school to Illusion, which causes the summoned creature to appear spectral. You can cast the Illusion version of each spell without expending a spell slot, but casting it without a slot halves the creature's Hit Points. Once you cast either spell without a spell slot, you must finish a Short Rest before you can cast the spell in that way again.

LEVEL 10: ILLUSORY SELF
When a creature makes an attack roll against you, you can use your Reaction to interpose the illusory duplicate between the attacker and yourself. The attack automatically misses you, then the illusion dissipates. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Short Rest or Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a of level 2+ spell slot (no action required).

LEVEL 14: ILLUSORY REALITY
You have learned to weave shadow magic into your illusions to give them a semi-reality. When you cast an Illusion spell with a spell slot, you can choose one inanimate, nonmagical object that is part of the illusion and make that object real. You can do this on your turn as a Bonus Action while the spell is ongoing. The object remains real for 1 minute, during which it can't deal damage or give any conditions. For example, you can create an illusion of a bridge over a chasm and then make it real long enough for your allies to cross.
---------------------------
Bladesinger
Bladesingers master a tradition of wizardry that incorporates swordplay and dance. Originally created by elves, this tradition has been adopted by non-elf practitioners, who honor and expand on the elven ways. In combat, a bladesinger uses a series of intricate, elegant maneuvers that fend off harm and allow the bladesinger to channel magic into devastating attacks and a cunning defense. Many who have observed a bladesinger at work remember the display as one of the more beautiful experiences in their life, a glorious dance accompanied by a singing blade.

3RD LEVEL: TRAINING IN WAR AND SONG
You gain proficiency with light armor, and you gain proficiency with one type of one-handed melee weapon of your choice. You also gain proficiency in the Performance skill if you don’t already have it.

3RD LEVEL: BLADESONG
You can invoke an elven magic called the Bladesong, provided that you aren’t wearing medium or heavy armor or using a shield. It graces you with supernatural speed, agility, and focus. You can use a bonus action to start the Bladesong, which lasts for 1 minute. It ends early if you are incapacitated, if you don medium or heavy armor or a shield, or if you use two hands to make an attack with a weapon. You can also dismiss the Bladesong at any time (no action required). While your Bladesong is active, you gain the following benefits:

You gain a bonus to your AC equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of +1)
Your walking speed increases by 10 feet.
You have advantage on Dexterity (Acrobatics) checks.
You gain a bonus to any Constitution saving throw you make to maintain your concentration on a spell. The bonus equals your Intelligence modifier (minimum of +1).
You can use this feature a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.
6TH LEVEL: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice, instead of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. Moreover, you can cast one of your cantrips in place of one of those attacks.

10TH LEVEL: SONG OF DEFENSE
You can direct your magic to absorb damage while your Bladesong is active. When you take damage, you can use your reaction to expend one spell slot and reduce that damage to you by an amount equal to five times the spell slot's level.

14TH LEVEL: SONG OF VICTORY
You can add your Intelligence modifier (minimum of +1) to the damage of your melee weapon attacks while your Bladesong is active.
---------------------------
Order of Scribes
Magic of the book-that's what many folk call wizardry. The name is apt, given how much time wizards spend poring over tomes and penning theories about the nature of magic. It's rare to see wizards traveling without books and scrolls sprouting from their bags, and a wizard would go to great lengths to plumb an archive of ancient knowledge. Among wizards, the Order of Scribes is the most bookish. It takes many forms in different worlds, but its primary mission is the same everywhere: recording magical discoveries so that wizardry can flourish. And while all wizards value spellbooks, a wizard in the Order of Scribes magically awakens their book, turning it into a trusted companion. All wizards study books, but a wizardly scribe talks to theirs!

3RD LEVEL: WIZARDLY QUILL
As a bonus action, you can magically create a Tiny quill in your free hand. The magic quill has the following properties:

The quill doesn’t require ink. When you write with it, it produces ink in a color of your choice on the writing surface.
The time you must spend to copy a spell into your spell book equals 2 minutes per spell level if you use the quill for the transcription.
You can erase anything you write with the quill if you wave the feather over the text as a bonus action, provided the text is within 5 feet of you.
This quill disappears if you create another one or if you die.

3RD LEVEL: AWAKENED SPELLBOOK
Using specially prepared inks and ancient incantations passed down by your wizardly order, you have awakened an arcane sentience within your spellbook, while you are holding the book, it grants you the following benefits:

You can use the book as a spellcasting focus for your wizard spells.
When you cast a wizard spell with a spell slot, you can temporarily replace its damage type with a type that appears in another spell in your spellbook, which magically alters the spell's formula for this casting only. The latter spell must be of the same level as the spell slot you expend.
When you cast a wizard spell as a ritual, you can use the spell's normal casting time, rather than adding 10 minutes to it. Once you use this benefit, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest.
If necessary, you can replace the book over the course of a short rest by using your Wizardly Quill to write arcane sigils in a blank book or a magic spellbook to which you're attuned. At the end of the rest, your spellbook's consciousness is summoned into the new book, which the consciousness transforms into your spellbook, along with all its spells. If the previous book still existed somewhere, all the spells vanish from its pages.

6TH LEVEL: MANIFEST MIND
You can conjure forth the mind of your Awakened Spellbook. As a bonus action while the book is on your person, you can cause the mind to manifest as a Tiny spectral object, hovering in an unoccupied space of your choice within 60 feet of you. The spectral mind is intangible and doesn't occupy its space, and it sheds dim light in a 10-foot radius. It looks like a ghostly tome, a cascade of text, or a scholar from the past (your choice). While manifested, the spectral mind can hear and see, and it has darkvision with a range of 60 feet. The mind can telepathically share with you what it sees and hears (no action required). Whenever you cast a wizard spell on your turn, you can cast it as if you were in the spectral mind's space, instead of your own, using its senses. You can do so a number of times per day equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. As a bonus action, you can cause the spectral mind to hover up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space that you or it can see. It can pass through creatures but not objects. The spectral mind stops manifesting if it is ever more than 300 feet away from you, if someone casts Dispel Magic on it, if the Awakened Spellbook is destroyed, if you die, or if you dismiss the spectral mind as a bonus action. Once you conjure the mind, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest, unless you expend a spell slot of any level to conjure it again.

10TH LEVEL: MASTER SCRIVENER
Whenever you finish a long rest, you can create one magic scroll by touching your Wizardly Quill to a blank piece of paper or parchment and causing one spell from your Awakened Spellbook to be copied onto the scroll. The spellbook must be within 5 feet of you when you make the scroll. The chosen spell must be of 1st or 2nd level and must have a casting time of 1 action. Once in the scroll, the spell's power is enhanced, counting as one level higher than normal. You can cast the spell from the scroll by reading it as an action. The scroll is unintelligible to anyone else, and the spell vanishes from the scroll when you cast it or when you finish your next long rest. You are also adept at crafting spell scrolls, which are described in the treasure chapter of the Dungeon Master's Guide. The gold and time you must spend to make such a scroll are halved if you use your Wizardly Quill.

14TH LEVEL: ONE WITH THE WORD
Your connection to your Awakened Spellbook has become so profound that your soul has become entwined with it. While the book is on your person, you have advantage on all Intelligence (Arcana) checks, as the spellbook helps you remember magical lore. Moreover, if you take damage while your spellbook's mind is manifested, you can prevent all of that damage to you by using your reaction to dismiss the spectral mind, using its magic to save yourself. Then roll 3d6. The spellbook temporarily loses spells of your choice that have a combined spell level equal to that roll or higher. For example, if the roll's total is 9, spells vanish from the book that have a combined level of at least 9, which could mean one 9th-level spell, three 3rd-level spells, or some other combination. If there aren't enough spells in the book to cover this cost, you drop to 0 hit points. Until you finish 1d6 long rests, you are incapable of casting the lost spells, even if you find them on a scroll or in another spellbook. After you finish the required number of rests, the spells reappear in the spell book. Once you use this reaction, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
War Magic
A variety of arcane colleges specialize in training wizards for war. The tradition of War Magic blends principles of evocation and abjuration, rather than specializing in either of those schools. It teaches techniques that empower a caster’s spells, while also providing methods for wizards to bolster their own defenses. Followers of this tradition are known as war mages. They see their magic as both a weapon and armor, a resource superior to any piece of steel. War mages act fast in battle, using their spells to seize tactical control of a situation. Their spells strike hard, while their defensive skills foil their opponents’ attempts to counterattack. War mages are also adept at turning other spellcasters' magical energy against them.

3RD LEVEL: ARCANE DEFLECTION
You have learned to weave your magic to fortify yourself against harm. When you are hit by an attack or you fail a saving throw, you can use your reaction to gain a +2 bonus to your AC against that attack or a +4 bonus to that saving throw. When you use this feature, you can’t cast spells other than cantrips until the end of your next turn.

3RD LEVEL: TACTICAL WIT
Your keen ability to assess tactical situations allows you to act quickly in battle. You can give yourself a bonus to your initiative rolls equal to your Intelligence modifier.

6TH LEVEL: POWER SURGE
You can store magical energy within yourself to later empower your damaging spells. You can store a maximum number of power surges equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of one). Whenever you finish a long rest, your number of power surges resets to one. Whenever you successfully end a spell with Dispel Magic or Counterspell, you gain one power surge, as you steal magic from the spell you foiled. If you end a short rest with no power surges, you gain one power surge. Once per turn when you deal damage to a creature or object with a wizard spell, you can spend one power surge to deal extra force damage to that target. The extra damage equals half your wizard level.

10TH LEVEL: DURABLE MAGIC
The magic you channel helps ward off harm. While you maintain concentration on a spell, you have a +2 bonus to AC and all saving throws.

14TH LEVEL: DEFLECTING SHROUD
Your Arcane Deflection becomes infused with deadly magic. When you use your Arcane Deflection feature, you can cause magical energy to arc from you. Up to three creatures of your choice within 60 feet of you each take force damage equal to half your wizard level.
=========================
ARTIFICER
https://5point5.fandom.com/wiki/Artificer_Infusion_Options

https://5point5.fandom.com/wiki/Artificer_Spell_List

This is a non-playtest class (and subclasses) that can be used. Check with your DM first before using it.

Masters of invention, artificers use ingenuity and magic to unlock extraordinary capabilities in objects. They see magic as a complex system waiting to be decoded and then harnessed in their spells and inventions. You can find everything you need to play one of these inventors in the next few sections. Artificers use a variety of tools to channel their arcane power. To cast a spell, an artificer might use alchemist's supplies to create a potent elixir, calligrapher's supplies to inscribe a sigil of power, or tinker's tools to craft a temporary charm. The magic of artificers is tied to their tools and their talents, and few other characters can produce the right tool for a job as well as an artificer.

CREATING AN ARTIFICER
To create a Artificer, consult the following lists, which provide Hit Points, proficiencies, and armor training. If you’re making a level 1 character, also consult the “Starting Equipment” section, and if you’re using the multiclassing rules, see the “Multiclassing and the Artificer” sidebar.

Then look at the Artificer table to see the class features you get at each level in this class. Descriptions of those features appear in the “Artificer Class Features” section.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d8 per artificer level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points after 1st Level: 1d8 (5) + your Constitution modifier per artificer level
PROFICIENCIES
Saving Throws: Constitution, Intelligence
Skills (Choose 2): Arcana, History, Investigation, Medicine, Nature, Perception, Sleight of Hand
Weapons: Simple weapons, Firearms
Tools: Thieves’ tools, tinker’s tools, one type of artisan’s tools of your choice
ARMOR TRAINING
Light armor, medium armor, shields

STARTING EQUIPMENT
Any two simple weapons
A light crossbow
20 bolts
(a) Studded leather armor or (b) Scale mail
Thieves’ tools and a Dungeoneer’s pack
5 GP
MULTICLASSING AND THE ARTIFICER
If your group uses the multiclassing rules in the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if you choose Artificer as one of your classes.

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, you must have a score of at least 13 in the Artificer’s primary ability, Intelligence, to take a level in this class or to take a level in another class if you’re already a Artificer.

Proficiencies Gained. If Artificer isn’t your initial class, here are the proficiencies you gain when you take your first level as an artificer: thieves’ tools, tinker’s tools.

Armor Training. When you gain your first Artificer level, you gain armor training Light armor, Medium armor and Shields.

Spell Slots. Add half your levels (rounded up) in the Artificer class to the appropriate levels from other classes to determine your available spell slots, as detailed in the multiclassing rules. You prepare spells for each of your classes individually, referring to the rules of each class to determine the number of spells you prepare for it.

ARTIFICER CLASS FEATURES
As an Artificer, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified levels in this class. These features are listed on the Artificer table.

The Artificer	Spell Slots per Spell Level
Level	Proficiency Bonus	Features	Infusions Known	Infused Items	Cantrips Known	1st	2nd	3rd	4th	5th	
1st	+2	Magical Tinkering, Spellcasting	-	-	2	2	-	-	-	-
2nd	+2	Infuse Item	4	2	2	2	-	-	-	-
3rd	+2	Artificer Specialist, The Right Tool for the Job	4	2	2	3	-	-	-	-
4th	+2	Ability Score Improvement	4	2	2	3	-	-	-	-
5th	+3	Artificer Specialist feature	4	2	2	4	2	-	-	-
6th	+3	Tool Expertise	6	3	2	4	2	-	-	-
7th	+3	Flash of Genius	6	3	2	4	3	-	-	-
8th	+3	Ability Score Improvement	6	3	2	4	3	-	-	-
9th	+4	Artificer Specialist feature	6	3	2	4	3	2	-	-
10th	+4	Magic Item Adept	8	4	3	4	3	2	-	-
11th	+4	Spell-Storing Item	8	4	3	4	3	3	-	-
12th	+4	Ability Score Improvement	8	4	3	4	3	3	-	-
13th	+5	-	8	4	3	4	3	3	1	-
14th	+5	Magic Item Savant	10	5	4	4	3	3	1	-
15th	+5	Artificer Specialist feature	10	5	4	4	3	3	2	-
16th	+5	Ability Score Improvement	10	5	4	4	3	3	2	-
17th	+6	-	10	5	4	4	3	3	3	1
18th	+6	Magic Item Master	12	6	4	4	3	3	3	1
19th	+6	Ability Score Improvement	12	6	4	4	3	3	3	2
20th	+6	Soul of Artifice	12	6	4	4	3	3	3	2
LEVEL 1: MAGICAL TINKERING
At 1st level, you've learned how to invest a spark of magic into mundane objects. To use this ability, you must have thieves' tools or artisan's tools in hand. You then touch a Tiny non-magical object as an action and give it one of the following magical properties of your choice:

The object sheds bright light in a 5-foot radius and dim light for an additional 5 feet.
Whenever tapped by a creature, the object emits a recorded message that can be heard up to 10 feet away. You utter the message when you bestow this property on the object, and the recording can be no more than 6 seconds long.
The object continuously emits your choice of an odor or a nonverbal sound (wind, waves, chirping, or the like). The chosen phenomenon is perceivable up to 10 feet away.
A static visual effect appears on one of the object's surfaces. This effect can be a picture, up to 25 words of text, lines and shapes, or a mixture of these elements, as you like.
The chosen property lasts indefinitely. As an action, you can touch the object and end the property early. You can bestow magic on multiple objects, touching one object each time you use this feature, though a single object can only bear one property at a time. The maximum number of objects you can affect with this feature at one time is equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of one object). If you try to exceed your maximum, the oldest property immediately ends, and then the new property applies.

LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING
You've studied the workings of magic and how to cast spells, channeling the magic through objects. To observers, you don't appear to be casting spells in a conventional way; you appear to produce wonders from mundane items and outlandish inventions. See the Player’s Handbook for rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as a Artificer.

Tools Required. You produce your artificer spell effects through your tools. You must have a spellcasting focus-specifically thieves' tools or some kind of artisan's tool-in hand when you cast any spell with this Spellcasting feature (meaning the spell has an "M" component when you cast it). You must be proficient with the tool to use it in this way. See the equipment chapter in the Player's Handbook for descriptions of these tools. After you gain the Infuse Item feature at 2nd level, you can also use any item bearing one of your infusions as a spellcasting focus.
Cantrips. At 1st level, you know two cantrips of your choice from the artificer spell list. At higher levels, you learn additional artificer can trips of your choice, as shown in the Cantrips Known column of the Artificer table. When you gain a level in this class, you can replace one of the artificer cantrips you know with another cantrip from the artificer spell list.
Preparing and Casting Spells. The Artificer table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your artificer spells. To cast one of your artificer spells of 1st level or higher, you must expend a slot of the spell's level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a long rest. You prepare the list of artificer spells that are available for you to cast, choosing from the artificer spell list. When you do so, choose a number of artificer spells equal to your Intelligence modifier + half your artificer level, rounded down (minimum of one spell). The spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you are a 5th-level artificer, you have four 1st-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With an Intelligence of 14, your list of prepared spells can include four spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If you prepare the 1st-level spell Cure Wounds, you can cast it using a lst-level or a 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell doesn't remove it from your list of prepared spells.
Changing your Prepared Spells. You can change your list of prepared spells when you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of artificer spells requires time spent tinkering with your spellcasting focuses: at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell on your list.
Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for the spells you cast with your Artificer features.
Ritual Casting. You can cast an artificer spell as a ritual if that spell has the ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.
LEVEL 2: INFUSE ITEM
You've gained the ability to imbue mundane items with certain magical infusions, turning those objects into magic items. When you gain this feature, pick four Artificer Infusions to learn. You learn additional infusions of your choice when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown in the Infusions Known column of the Artificer table. Whenever you gain a level in this class, you can replace one of the artificer infusions you learned with a new one.

Whenever you finish a long rest, you can touch a non-magical object and imbue it with one of your artificer infusions, turning it into a magic item. An infusion works on only certain kinds of objects, as specified in the infusion's description. If the item requires attunement, you can attune yourself to it the instant you infuse the item. If you decide to attune to the item later, you must do so using the normal process for attunement (see the attunement rules in the Dungeon Master's Guide).

Your infusion remains in an item indefinitely, but when you die, the infusion vanishes after a number of days equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of 1 day). The infusion also vanishes if you replace your knowledge of the infusion. You can infuse more than one non-magical object at the end of a long rest; the maximum number of objects appears in the Infused Items column of the Artificer table. You must touch each of the objects, and each of your infusions can be in only one object at a time. Moreover, no object can bear more than one of your infusions at a time. If you try to exceed your maximum number of infusions, the oldest infusion ends, and then the new infusion applies. If an infusion ends on an item that contains other things, like a bag of holding, its contents harmlessly appear in and around its space.

LEVEL 3: ARTIFICER SUBCLASS
You gain an Artificer subclass, Your choice grants you features at 5th level and again at 9th and 15th level.

Alchemist
Armourer
Artillerist
Battle Smith
Subclasses are detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you special features at certain Artificer levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Artificer level and lower.

LEVEL 3: THE RIGHT TOOL FOR THE JOB
You've learned how to produce exactly the tool you need: with thieves' tools or artisan's tools in hand, you can magically create one set of artisan's tools in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of you. This creation requires 1 hour of uninterrupted work, which can coincide with a short or long rest. Though the product of magic, the tools are non-magical, and they vanish when you use this feature again.

LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. As shown on the Artificer table, you gain this feature again at levels 8, 12, 16, and 19.

LEVEL 6: TOOL EXPERTISE
Your proficiency bonus is now doubled for any ability check you make that uses your proficiency with a tool.

LEVEL 7: FLASH OF GENIUS
You've gained the ability to come up with solutions under pressure. When you or another creature you can see within 30 feet of you makes an ability check or a saving throw, you can use your reaction to add your Intelligence modifier to the roll. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 10: MAGIC ITEM ADEPT
You achieve a profound understanding of how to use and make magic items, giving you the following benefits:

You can attune to up to four magic items at once.
If you craft a magic item with a rarity of common or uncommon, it takes you a quarter of the normal time, and it costs you half as much of the usual gold.
LEVEL 11: SPELL-STORING ITEM
You can now store a spell in an object. Whenever you finish a long rest, you can touch one simple or martial weapon or one item that you can use as a spellcasting focus, and you store a spell in it, choosing a 1st- or 2nd-level spell from the artificer spell list that requires 1 action to cast (you needn't have it prepared). While holding the object, a creature can take an action to produce the spell's effect from it, using your spellcasting ability modifier. If the spell requires concentration, the creature must concentrate. The spell stays in the object until it's been used a number of times equal to twice your Intelligence modifier (minimum of twice) or until you use this feature again to store a spell in an object.

LEVEL 14: MAGIC ITEM SAVANT
At 14th level, your skill with magic items deepens more, giving you the following benefits:

You can attune to up to five magic items at once.
You ignore all class, race, spell and level requirements on attuning to or using a magic item.
LEVEL 18: MAGIC ITEM MASTER
You can attune up to six magic items at once.

LEVEL 20: SOUL OF ARTIFICE
You develop a mystical connection to your magic items, which you can draw on for protection, giving you the following benefits:

You gain a +1 bonus to all saving throws per magic item you are currently attuned to.
If you're reduced to 0 hit points but not killed out-right, you can use your reaction to end one of your artificer infusions, causing you to drop to 1 hit point instead of 0.
---------------------------
Alchemist
An Alchemist is an expert at combining reagents to produce mystical effects. Alchemists use their creations to give life and to leech it away. Alchemy is the oldest of artificer traditions, and its versatility has long been valued during times of war and peace.

LEVEL 3: TOOL PROFICIENCY
You gain proficiency with alchemist's supplies. If you already have this proficiency, you gain proficiency with one other type of artisan's tools of your choice.

LEVEL 3: ALCHEMIST SPELLS
You always have certain spells prepared after you reach particular levels in this class, as shown in the Alchemist Spells table. These spells count as artificer spells for you, but they don’t count against the number of artificer spells you prepare.

Alchemist Spells
Artificer Level	Alchemist Spells
3rd	Healing Word, Ray of Sickness
5th	Flaming Sphere, Melf's Acid Arrow
9th	Gaseous Form, Mass Healing Word
13th	Blight, Death Ward
17th	Cloudkill, Raise Dead
LEVEL 3: EXPERIMENTAL ELIXIR
Whenever you finish a long rest, you can magically produce an experimental elixir in an empty flask you touch. Roll on the Experimental Elixir table for the elixir's effect, which is triggered when someone drinks the elixir. As an action, a creature can drink the elixir or administer it to an incapacitated creature. You can create additional experimental elixirs by expending a spell slot of 1st level or higher for each one. When you do so, you use your action to create the elixir in an empty flask you touch, and you choose the elixir's effect from the Experimental Elixir table. Creating an experimental elixir requires you to have alchemist supplies on your person, and any elixir you create with this feature lasts until it is drunk or until the end of your next long rest. When you reach certain levels in this class, you can make more elixirs at the end of a long rest: two at 6th level and three at 15th level. Roll for each elixir's effect separately. Each elixir requires its own flask.

Experimental Elixir table
d6	Elixir
1	Healing. The drinker regains a number of hit points equal to 2d4 + your Int Modifier
2	Swiftness. The drinker's walking speed increases by 10 feet for 1 hour.
3	Resilience. The drinker gains a +1 bonus to AC for 10 minutes.
4	Boldness. The drinker can roll a d4 and add the number rolled to every attack roll and saving throw they make for the next minute.
5	Flight. The drinker gains a flying speed of 10 feet for 10 minutes.
6	Transformation. The drinker's body is transformed as if by the Alter Self spell. The drinker determines the transformation caused by the spell, the effects of which last for 10 minutes.
LEVEL 5: ALCHEMICAL SAVANT
You've developed a masterful command of magical chemicals, enhancing the healing and damage you create through them. Whenever you cast a spell using your alchemist's supplies as the spellcasting focus, you gain a bonus to one roll of the spell. That roll must restore hit points or be a damage roll that deals acid, fire, necrotic, or poison damage, and the bonus equals your Intelligence modifier (minimum of +1).

LEVEL 9: RESTORATIVE REAGENTS
You can incorporate restorative reagents into some of your works, giving you the following benefits:

Whenever a creature drinks an experimental elixir you created, the creature gains temporary hit points equal to 2d6 + your Intelligence modifier (minimum of 1 temporary hit point).
You can cast Lesser Restoration without expending a spell slot and without preparing the spell, provided you use alchemist's supplies as the spellcasting focus. You can do so a number of times equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
LEVEL 15: CHEMICAL MASTERY
You have been exposed to so many chemicals that they pose little risk to you, and you can use them to quickly end certain ailments:

You gain resistance to acid damage and poison damage, and you are now immune to the poisoned condition.
You can cast Greater Restoration and Heal without expending a spell slot, without preparing the spell, and without providing the material component, provided you use alchemist’s supplies as the spellcasting focus. Once you cast either spell with this feature, you can't cast that spell with it again until you finish a long rest.
---------------------------
Armorer
An artificer who specializes as an Armourer modifies armor to function almost like a second skin. The armor is enhanced to hone the artificer's magic, unleash potent attacks, and generate a formidable defense. The artificer bonds with this armor, becoming one with it even as they experiment with it and refine its magical capabilities.

LEVEL 3: TOOLS OF THE TRADE
You gain proficiency with heavy armor. You also gain proficiency with smith's tools. If you already have this tool proficiency, you gain proficiency with one other type of artisan's tools of your choice.

LEVEL 3: ARMORER SPELLS
You always have certain spells prepared after you reach particular levels in this class, as shown in the Armourer Spells table. These spells count as artificer spells for you, but they don't count against the number of artificer spells you prepare.

Artificer Level	Armorer Spells
3rd	Magic Missile, Thunderwave
5th	Mirror Image, Shatter
9th	Hypnotic Pattern, Lightning Bolt
13th	Fire Shield, Greater Invisibility
17th	Passwall, Wall of Force
LEVEL 3: ARCANE ARMOR
Your metallurgical pursuits have led to you making armor a conduit for your magic. As an action, you can turn a suit of armor you are wearing into Arcane Armor, provided you have smith's tools in hand, you gain the following benefits while wearing this armor:

If the armor normally has a Strength requirement, the arcane armor lacks this requirement for you.
You can use the arcane armor as a spellcasting focus for your artificer spells.
The armor attaches to you and can’t be removed against your will. It also expands to cover your entire body, although you can retract or deploy the helmet as a bonus action. The armor replaces any missing limbs, functioning identically to a body part it is replacing.
The armor continues to be Arcane Armor until you don another suit of armor or you die.

LEVEL 3: ARMOR MODEL
You can customize your Arcane Armor. When you do so, choose one of the following armor models: Guardian or Infiltrator. The model you choose gives you special benefits while you wear it. Each model includes a special weapon. When you attack with that weapon, you can add your Intelligence modifier, instead of Strength or Dexterity, to the attack and damage rolls. You can change the armor's model whenever you finish a short or long rest, provided you have smith's tools in hand.

Guardian. You design your armor to be in the front line of conflict. It has the following features:
Thunder Gauntlets. Each of the armor's gauntlets counts as a simple melee weapon while you aren't holding anything in it, and it deals 1d8 thunder damage on a hit. A creature hit by the gauntlet has disadvantage on attack rolls against targets other than you until the start of your next turn, as the armor magically emits a distracting pulse when the creature attacks someone else.
Defensive Field. As a bonus action, you can gain temporary hit points equal to your level in this class, replacing any temporary hit points you already have. You lose these temporary hit points if you doff the armor. You can use this bonus action a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
Infiltrator. You customize your armor for subtle undertakings. It has the following features:
Lightning Launcher. A gemlike node appears on one of your armored fists or on the chest (your choice). It counts as a simple ranged weapon, with a normal range of 90 feet and a long range of 300 feet, and it deals 1d6 lightning damage on a hit. Once on each of your turns when you hit a creature with it, you can deal an extra 1d6 lightning damage to that target.
Powered Steps. Your walking speed increases by 5 feet.
Dampening Field. You have advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. If the armor normally imposes disadvantage on such checks, the advantage and disadvantage cancel each other, as normal.
LEVEL 5: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice, rather than once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

LEVEL 9: ARMOR MODIFICATIONS
You learn how to use your artificer infusions to specially modify your Arcane Armor. That armor now counts as separate items for the purposes of your Infuse Items feature: armor (the chest piece), boots, helmet, and the armor's special weapon. Each of those items can bear one of your infusions, and the infusions transfer over if you change your armor's model with the Armor Model feature. In addition, the maximum number of items you can infuse at once increases by 2, but those extra items must be part of your Arcane Armor.

LEVEL 15: PERFECTED ARMOR
Your Arcane Armor gains additional benefits based on its model, as shown below.

Guardian. When a Huge or smaller creature you can see ends its turn within 30 feet of you, you can use your reaction to magically force the creature to make a Strength saving throw against your spell save DC, pulling the creature up to 30 feet toward you to an unoccupied space. If you pull the target to a space within 5 feet of you, you can make a melee weapon attack against it as part of this reaction. You can use this reaction a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest.
Infiltrator. Any creature that takes lightning damage from your Lightning Launcher glimmers with magical light until the start of your next turn. The glimmering creature sheds dim light in a 5-foot radius, and it has disadvantage on attack rolls against you, as the light jolts it if it attacks you. In addition, the next attack roll against it has advantage, and if that attack hits, the target takes an extra 1d6 lightning damage.
---------------------------
Artillerist
An Artillerist specializes in using magic to hurl energy, projectiles, and explosions on a battlefield. This destructive power is valued by armies in the wars on many different worlds. And when war passes, some members of this specialization seek to build a more peaceful world by using their powers to fight the resurgence of strife.

LEVEL 3: TOOL PROFICIENCY
You gain proficiency with woodcarver's tools. If you already have this proficiency, you gain proficiency with one other type of artisan's tools of your choice.

LEVEL 3: ARTILLERIST SPELLS
You always have certain spells prepared after you reach particular levels in this class, as shown in the Artillerist Spells table. These spells count as artificer spells for you, but they don’t count against the number of artificer spells you prepare.

Artificer Level	Artillerist Spells
3rd	Shield, Thunderwave
5th	Scorching Ray, Shatter
9th	Fireball, Wind Wall
13th	Ice Storm, Wall of Fire
17th	Cone of Cold, Wall of Force
LEVEL 3: ELDRITCH CANNON
You've learned how to create a magical cannon. Using woodcarver's tools or smith's tools, you can take an action to magically create a Small or Tiny eldritch cannon in an unoccupied space on a horizontal surface within 5 feet of you. A Small eldritch cannon occupies its space, and a Tiny one can be held in one hand. Once you create a cannon, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest or until you expend a spell slot to create one. You can have only one cannon at a time and can't create one while your cannon is present. The cannon is a magical object. Regardless of size, the cannon has an AC of 18 and a number of hit points equal to five times your artificer level. It is immune to poison damage and psychic damage. If it is forced to make an ability check or a saving throw, treat all its ability scores as 10 (+0). If the mending spell is cast on it, it regains 2d6 hit points. It disappears if it is reduced to 0 hit points or after 1 hour. You can dismiss it early as an action. When you create the cannon, you determine its appearance and whether it has legs. You also decide which type it is, choosing from the options on the Eldritch Cannons table. On each of your turns, you can take a bonus action to cause the cannon to activate if you are within 60 feet of it. As part of the same bonus action, you can direct the cannon to walk or climb up to 15 feet to an unoccupied space, provided it has legs.

Eldritch Cannon Table
Cannon	Activation
Flamethrower	The cannon exhales fire in an adjacent 15-foot cone that you designate. Each creature in that area must make a Dexterity saving throw against your spell save DC, taking 2d8 fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. The fire ignites any flammable objects in the area that aren't being worn or carried.
Force Ballista	Make a ranged spell attack, originating from the cannon, at one creature or object within 120 feet of it. On a hit, the target takes 2d8 force damage, and if the target is a creature, it is pushed up to 5 feet away from the cannon.
Protector	The cannon emits a burst of positive energy that grants itself and each creature of your choice within 10 feet of it a number of temporary hit points equal to 1d8 + your Intelligence modifier (minimum of +1).
LEVEL 5: ARCANE FIREARM
You know how to turn a wand, staff, or rod into an arcane firearm, a conduit for your destructive spells. When you finish a long rest, you can use woodcarver's tools to carve special sigils into a wand, staff, or rod and thereby turn it into your arcane firearm. The sigils disappear from the object if you later carve them on a different item. The sigils otherwise last indefinitely. You can use your arcane firearm as a spellcasting focus for your artificer spells. When you cast an artificer spell through the firearm, roll a d8, and you gain a bonus to one of the spell's damage rolls equal to the number rolled.

LEVEL 9: EXPLOSIVE CANNON
Every eldritch cannon you create is more destructive:

The cannon's damage rolls all increase by 1d8.
As an action, you can command the cannon to detonate if you are within 60 feet of it. Doing so destroys the cannon and forces each creature within 20 feet of it to make a Dexterity saving throw against your spell save DC, taking 3d8 force damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one.
LEVEL 15: FORTIFIED POSITION
You’re a master at forming well-defended emplacements using Eldritch Cannon:

You and your allies have half cover while within 10 feet of a cannon you create with Eldritch Cannon, as a result of a shimmering field of magical protection that the cannon emits.
You can now have two cannons at the same time. You can create two with the same action (but not the same spell slot), and you can activate both of them with the same bonus action. You determine whether the cannons are identical to each other or different. You can't create a third cannon while you have two.
---------------------------
Battle Smith
Armies require protection, and someone has to put things back together if defenses fail. A combination of protector and medic, a Battle Smith is an expert at defending others and repairing both materiel and personnel. To aid in their work, Battle Smiths are accompanied by a steel defender, a protective companion of their own creation. Many soldiers tell stories of nearly dying before being saved by a Battle Smith and a steel defender.

LEVEL 3: TOOL PROFICIENCY
You gain proficiency with smith's tools. If you already have this proficiency, you gain proficiency with one other type of artisan's tools of your choice.

LEVEL 3: BATTLE SMITH SPELLS
You always have certain spells prepared after you reach particular levels in this class, as shown in the Battle Smith Spells table. These spells count as artificer spells for you, but they don’t count against the number of artificer spells you prepare.

Artificer Level	Battle Smith Spells
3rd	Heroism, Shield
5th	Shining Smite, Warding Bond
9th	Aura of Vitality, Conjure Barrage
13th	Aura of Purity, Fire Shield
17th	Banishing Smite, Mass Cure Wounds
LEVEL 3: BATTLE READY
Your combat training and your experiments with magic have paid off in two ways:

You gain proficiency with martial weapons.
When you attack with a magic weapon, you can use your Intelligence modifier, instead of Strength or Dexterity modifier, for the attack and damage rolls.
LEVEL 3: STEEL DEFENDER
Your tinkering has borne you a faithful companion, a steel defender. It's friendly to you and your companions, and it obeys your commands. See its game statistics in the Steel Defender stat block, which uses your proficiency bonus (PB) in several places. You determine the creature's appearance and whether it has two legs or four; your choice has no effect on its game statistics. In combat, the defender shares your initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It can move and use its reaction on its own, but the only action it takes on its turn is the Dodge action, unless you take a bonus action on your turn to command it to take another action. That action can be one in its stat block or some other action. If you are incapacitated, the defender can take any action of its choice, not just Dodge. If the Mending spell is cast on it, it regains 2d6 hit points. If it has died within the last hour, you can use your smith's tools as an action to revive it, provided you are within 5 feet of it and you expend a spell slot of 1st level or higher. The steel defender returns to life after 1 minute with all its hit points restored. At the end of a long rest, you can create a new steel defender if you have smith's tools with you. If you already have a defender from this feature, the first one immediately perishes. The defender also perishes if you die.

LEVEL 5: EXTRA ATTACK
You can attack twice, rather than once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

LEVEL 9: ARCANE JOLT
You've learn new ways to channel arcane energy to harm or heal. When either you hit a target with a magic weapon attack or your steel defender hits a target, you can channel magical energy through the strike to create one of the following effects:

The target takes an extra 2d6 force damage.
Choose one creature or object you can see within 30 feet of the target. Healing energy flows into the chosen recipient, restoring 2d6 hit points to it.
You can use this energy a number of times equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of once), but you can do so no more than once on a turn. You regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

LEVEL 15: IMPROVED DEFENDER
At 15th level, your Arcane Jolt and steel defender become more powerful:

The extra damage and the healing of your Arcane Jolt both increase to 4d6.
Your steel defender gains a +2 bonus to Armor Class.
Whenever your steel defender uses its Deflect Attack, the attacker takes force damage equal to 1d4 + your Intelligence modifier.

